JAWAHARLAL 
NEHRU 

The Discovery of India 



JAWAHARLAL 
NEHRU 

The Discovery of India 



DELHI 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

OXFORD NEW YORK 



Oxford University (Press, Walton Street, Oxford 0X2 61X2 

OXFORD NEW YORK 

ATHENS AUCKLAND BANGKOK BOMBAY 

CALCUTTA CAPE TOWN DAR ES SALAAM DELHI 

FLORENCE HONG KONG ISTANBUL KARACHI 

KUALA LUMPUR MADRAS MADRID MELBOURNE 

MEXICO CITY NAIROBI PARIS SINGAPORE 

TAIPEI TOKYO TORONTO 

and associates in 

BERLIN IBADAN 



Rajiv Gandhi 1985 



First published 1946 by 

The Signet Press, Calcutta 

Centenary Edition 1989 

Sixth impression 1994 



Printed at Rekha Printers Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 110020 

and published by Neil O'Brien, Oxford University Press 

YMCA Library Building, Jai Singh Road, New Delhi 110001 



To my colleagues and co-prisoners in 

the Ahmadnagar Fort Prison Camp 
from 9 August 1942 to 28 March 1945 



FOREWORD 

My father's three books — Glimpses of World History, An 
Autobiograpy and The Discovery of India — have been my 
companions through life. It is difficult to be detached about 
them. 

Indeed Glimpses was' written for me. It remains the best 
introduction to the story of man for young and growing people 
in India and all over the world. The Autobiography has been 
acclaimed as not merely the quest of one individual for free- 
dom, but as an insight into the making of the mind of new 
India. I had to correct the proofs of Discovery while my father 
was away, I think in Calcutta, and I was in Allahabad ill with 
mumps! The Discovery delves deep into the sources- of India's 
national personality. Together, these books have moulded a 
whole generation of Indians and inspired persons from many 
other countries. 

Books fascinated Jawaharlal Nehru. He sought out ideas. 
He was extraordinarily sensitive to literary beauty. In his 
writings he aimed at describing his motives and appraisals as 
meticulously as possible. The purpose was not self-justification 
or rationalization, but to show the Tightness and inevitability 
of the actions and events in which he was a prime participant. 
He was a luminous man and his writings reflected the radiance 
of his spirit. 

The decision of the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund to 
bring out a uniform edition of these three classics will be 
widely welcomed. 

Indira Gandhi 
New Delhi 
4 November 1980 



PREFACE 

This book was written by me in Ahmadnagar Fort prison during 
the five months, April to September 1944. Some of my colleagues 
in prison were good enough to read the manuscript and make 
a number of valuable suggestions. On revising the book in prison 
I took advantage of these suggestions and made some additions. 
No one, I need hardly add, is responsible for what I have 
written or necessarily agrees with it. But I must express my deep 
gratitude to my fellow-prisoners in Ahmadnagar Fort for the 
innumerable talks and discussions we had, which helped me 
greatly to clear my own mind about various aspects of Indian 
history and culture. Prison is not a pleasant place to live in even 
for a short period, much less for long years. But it was a privilege 
for me to live in close contact with men of outstanding ability 
and culture and a wide human outlook which even the passions 
of the moment did not obscure. 

My eleven companions in Ahmadnagar Fort were an interesting 
cross-section of India and represented in their several ways not 
only politics but Indian scholarship, old and new, and various 
aspects of present-day India. Nearly all the principal living 
Indian languages, as well as the classical languages which have 
powerfully influenced India in the past and present, were 
represented and the standard was often that of high scholarship. 
Among the classical languages were Sanskrit and Pali, Arabic 
and Persian; the modern languages were Hindi, Urdu, Bengali, 
Gujarati, Marathi, Telugu, Sindhi and Oriya. I had all this wealth 
to draw upon and the only limitation was my own capacity to 
profit by it. Though I am grateful to all my companions, I should 
like to mention especially Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, whose 
vast erudition invariably delighted me but sometimes also rather 
overwhelmed me, Govind Ballabh Pant, Narendra Deva and 
M. Asaf Ali. 

It is a year and a quarter since I finished writing this book 
and some parts of it are already somewhat out of date, and much 
has happened since I wrote it. I have felt tempted to add and 



10 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

revise, but I have resisted the temptation. Indeed I could not 
have done otherwise for life outside prison is of a different 
texture and there is no leisure for thought or writing. It has been 
difficult enough for me to read again what I have written. I 
wrote originally in long-hand; this was typed after my release. 
I was unable to find time to read the typescript and the 
publication of the book was being delayed when my daughter, 
Indira, came to my rescue and took this burden off my shoulders. 
The book remains as written in prison with no additions or 
changes, except for the postscript at the end. 

I do not know how other authors feel about their writings, 
but always I have a strange sensation when I read something 
that I had written some time previously. That sensation is 
heightened when the writing had been done in the close and 
abnormal atmosphere of prison and the subsequent reading has 
taken place outside. I recognize it of course, but not wholly; 
it seems almost that I was reading some familiar piece written 
by another, who was near to me and yet who was different. 
Perhaps that is the measure of the change that has taken place 
in me. 

So I have felt about this book also. It is mine and not wholly 
mine, as I am constituted today; it represents rather some past 
self of mine which has already joined that long succession df 
other selves that existed for a while and faded away, leaving 
only a memory behind. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Anand Bhawan, Allahabad 
29 December 1945 



CONTENTS 

Foreword 7 

Preface 9 

CHAPTER ONE: AHMADNAGAR FORT 

Twenty Months 15 

Famine 16 

The War for Democracy 18 

Time in Prison: The Urge to Action 20 

The Past in Its Relation to the Present 22 

Life's Philosophy 24 

The flurden of the Past 33 

CHAPTER TWO: BADENWEILER, LAUSANNE 

Kamala 39 

Our Marriage and After 40 

The Problem of Human Relationships 43 

Christmas 1935 44 

Death 45 

Mussolini Return 46 

CHAPTER THREE: THE QUEST 

The Panorama of India's Past 49 

Nationalism and Internationalism 52 

India's Strength and Weakness 53 

The Search for India 57 

'Bharat Mata' 59 

The Variety and Unity of India 61 

Travelling through India 63 

General Elections 64 

The Culture of the Masses 67 

Two Lives 68 

CHAPTER FOUR: THE DISCOVERY OF INDIA 

The Indus Valley Civilization 69 

The Coming of the Aryans 72 

What is Hinduism? 74 

The Earliest Record, Scripture and Mythology 76 

The Vedas 79 

The Acceptance and the Negation of Life 80 

Synthesis and Adjustment. The Beginnings of the Caste System 84 

The Continuity of Indian Culture 87 
The Upanishads 



12 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

The Advantages and Disadvantages of an Individualistic 93 

Philosophy 

Materialism 96 

The Epics. History, Tradition, and Myth 99 

The Mahabharata 106 

.The Bhagavad Gita 108 

Life and Work in Ancient India 110 

Mahavira and Buddha: Caste 119 

Chandragupta and Chanakya. The Maurya Empire Established 122 

The Organization of the State 124 

Buddha's Teaching 127 

The Buddha Story 130 

Ashoka 132 

CHAPTER FIVE: THROUGH THE AGES 

Nationalism and Imperialism under the Guptas 136 

South India 139 

Peaceful Development and Methods of Warfare 140 

India's Urge to Freedom 141 

Progress versus Security 143 

India and Iran 146 

India and Greece ISO 

The Old Indian Theatre 157 

Vitality and Persistence of Sanskrit 164 

Buddhist Philosophy 170 

Effect of Buddhism on Hinduism 174 

How did Hinduism Absorb Buddhism in India? 178 

The Indian Philosophical Approach 180 

The Six Systems of Philosophy 183 

India and China 192 

Indian Colonies and Culture in South-East Asia 200 

The Influence of Indian Art Abroad 207 

Old Indian Art 210 

India's Foreign Trade 214 

Mathematics in Ancient India 216 

Growth and Decay 221 

CHAPTER SIX: NEW PROBLEMS 

The Arabs and the Mongols . 227 

The Flowering of Arab Culture and Contacts with India 231 

Mahmud of Ghazni and the Afghans 234 

The Indo-Afghans. South India. Vijayanagar. Babar. 237 

Sea Power 

Synthesis and Growth of Mixed Culture. Purdah. Kabir. 24 

Guru Nanak. Amir Khusrau 
The Indian Social Structure. Importance of the Group 
Village Self-Government. The Shukra Nitisara 



CONTENTS 13 

The Theory and Practice of Caste. The Joint Family 250 

Babar and Akbar: The Process of Indianization 257 

The Contrast between Asia and Europe in Mechanical 260 

Advance and Creative Energy 

Development of a Common Culture 265 

Aurangzeb Puts the Clock Back. Growth of Hindu Nationalism. 270 

Shivaji 

The Marathas and the British Struggle for Supremacy. 273 

Triumph of the British 

The Backwardness of India and the Superiority of the English 276 

in Organization and Technique 

Ranjit Singh and Jai Singh 281 

The Economic Background of India: The Two Englands 284 

CHAPTER SEVEN: THE LAST PHASE (1): CONSOLIDATION 
OF BRITISH RULE AND RISE OF NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 

The Ideology of Empire. The New Caste 289 

The Plunder of Bengal Helps the Industrial Revolution 295 

in England 

The Destruction of India's Industry and the Decay of 298 

her Agriculture 

India Becomes for the First Time a Political and Economic 302 

Appendage of Another Country 

The Growth of the Indian States System 307 

Contradictions of British Rule in India. Ram Mohan Roy. 312 

The Press. Sir William Jones. English Education in Bengal 

The Great Revolt of 1857. Racialism 322 

The Techniques of British Rule: Balance and Counterpoise 327 

Growth of Industry: Provincial Differences 330 

Reform and Other Movements among Hindus and Moslems 335 

Kemal Pasha. Nationalism in Asia. Iqbal 350 

Heavy Industry Begins. Tilak and Gokhale. Separate 352 

Electorates 



CHAPTER EIGHT: THE LAST PHASE (2): NATIONALISM 
VERSUS IMPERIALISM 

Helplessness of the Middle Classes. Gandhi Comes 356 

The Congress Becomes a Dynamic Organization under 360 

Gandhi's Leadership 

Congress Governments in the Provinces 365 

Indian Dynamism versus British Conservatism in India 371 

The Question of Minorities. The Moslem League: Mr M.A. Jinnah 380 

The National Planning Committee 395 

The Congress and Industry: Big Industry versus Cottage Industry 402 

Government Checks Industrial Growth. War Production is 409 

Diversion from Normal Production 



14 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

CHAPTER NINE: THE LAST PHASE (3): WORLD WAR II 

The Congress Develops a Foreign Policy 416 

The Congress Approach to War 422 

Reaction to War 426 

Another Congress Offer and Its Rejection by the British 432 

Government. Mr Winston Churchill 

Individual Civil Disobedience 439 

After Pearl Harbour. Gandhi and Non-Violence 442 

Tension 449 

Sir Stafford Cripps Comes to India 453 

Frustration 464 

The Challenge: Quit India Resolution 468 

CHAPTER TEN: AHMADNAGAR FORT AGAIN 

The Chain of Happening 479 

The Two Backgrounds: Indian and British 480 

Mass Upheavals and Their Suppression 484 

Reactions Abroad 491 

Reactions in India 493 

India's Sickness: Famine 495 

India's Dynamic Capacity 499 

India's Growth Arrested 505 

Religion, Philosophy, and Science 509 

The Importance of the National Idea. Changes Necessary 515 

in India 

India: Partition or Strong National State or Centre of 524 

Supra-National State? 

Realism and Geopolitics. World Conquest or World 536 

Association. The U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. 

Freedom and Empire 548 

The Problem of Population. Falling Birth-rates and 551 

National Decay 

The Modern Approach to an Old Problem 557 
Epilogue 

POSTSCRIPT 

Allahabad 29th December 1945 567 

Index 569 



CHAPTER ONE 

AHMADNAGAR FORT 
Twenty Months 

Ahmadnagar Fort, 13th April 1944 

IT IS MORE THAN TWENTY MONTHS SINCE WE WERE BROUGHT HERE, 

more than twenty months of my ninth term of imprisonment. 
The new moon, a shimmering crescent in the darkening sky, 
greeted us on our arrival here. The bright fortnight of the waxing 
moon had begun. Ever since then each coming of the new moon 
has been a reminder to me that another month of my imprison- 
ment is over. So it was with my last term of imprisonment which 
began with the new moon, just after the Deepavali, the festival of 
light. The moon, ever a companion to me in prison, has grown 
more friendly with closer acquaintance, a reminder of the loveli- 
ness of this world, of the waxing and waning of life, of light 
following darkness, of death and resurrection following each other 
in interminable succession. Ever changing, yet ever the same, I 
have watched it in its different phases and its many moods in the 
evening, as the shadows lengthen, in the still hours of the night, 
and when the breath and whisper of dawn bring promise of the 
coming day. How helpful is the moon in counting the days and the 
months, for the size and shape of the moon, when it is visible, 
indicate the day of the month with a fair measure of exactitude. 
It is an easy calendar (though it must be adjusted from time to 
time), and for the peasant in the field the most-convenient one to 
indicate the passage of the days and the gradual changing of the 
seasons. 

Three weeks we spent here cut off completely from all news 
of the outside world. There were no contacts of any kind, no 
interviews, no letters, no newspapers, no radio. Even our presence 
here was supposed to be a state secret unknown to any except to 
the officials in charge ofus, a poor secret, for all India knew where 
we were. 

Then newspapers were allowed and, some weeks later, letters 
from near relatives dealing with domestic affairs. But no 



interviews during these 20 months, no other contacts. 

The newspapers contained heavily censored news. Yet they 
gave us some idea of the war that was consuming more than half 
the world, and of how it fared with our people in India. Little 
we knew about these people of ours except that scores of thou- 
sands lay in prison or internment camp without trial, that thou- 
sands had been shot to death, that tens of thousands had been 
driven out of schools and colleges, that something indistinguish- 
able from martial law prevailed over the whole country, that terror 
and frightfulness darkened the land. They were worse off, far 
worse than us, those scores of thousands in prison, like us, without 
trial, for there were not only no interviews but also no letters or 
newspapers for them, and even books were seldom allowed. Many 
sickened for lack of healthy food, some of our dear ones died for 
lack of proper care and treatment. 

There were many thousands of prisoners of war kept in India, 
mostly from Italy. We compared their lot with the lot of our own 
people. We were told that they were governed by the Geneva 
Convention. But there was no convention or law or rule to govern 
the conditions under which Indian prisoners and detenus had to 
exist, except such ordinances which it pleased our British rulers to 
issue from time to time. 

Famine 

Famine came, ghastly, staggering, horrible beyond words. In 
Malabar, in Bijapur, in Orissa, and, above all, in the rich and 
fertile province of Bengal, men and women and little children 
died in their thousands daily for lack of food. They dropped down 
dead before the palaces of Calcutta, their corpses lay in the mud- 
huts of Bengal's innumerable villages and covered the roads and 
fields of its rural areas. Men were dying all over the world and 
killing each other in battle; usually a quick death, often a brave 
death, death for a cause, death with a purpose, death which 
seemed in this mad world of ours an inexorable logic of events, 
a sudden end to the life we could not mould or control. Death 
was common enough everywhere. 

But here death had no purpose, no logic, no necessity; it was 
the result of man's incompetence and callousness, man-made, a 
slow creeping thing of horror with nothing to redeem it, life 
merging and fading into death, with death looking out of the 
shrunken eyes and withered frame while life still lingered for a 
while. And so it was not considered right or proper to mention 
it; it was not good form to talk or write of unsavoury topics. To 
do so was to 'dramatize' an unfortunate situation. False reports 

16 



were issued by those in authority in India and in England. But 
corpses cannot easily be overlooked; they come in the way. 

While the fires of hell were consuming the people of Bengal 
and elsewhere, we were first told by high authority that owing 
to wartime prosperity the peasantry in many parts of India had 
too much to eat. Then it was said that the fault lay with pro- 
vincial autonomy, and that the British Government in India, or 
the India Office in London, sticklers for constitutional propriety, 
could not interfere with provincial affairs. That constitution was 
suspended, violated, ignored, or changed daily by hundreds of 
decrees and ordinances issued by the Viceroy under his sole and 
unlimited authority. That constitution meant ultimately the 
unchecked authoritarian rule of a single individual who was 
responsible to no one in India, and who had greater power than 
any dictator anywhere in the world. That constitution was worked 
by the permanent services, chiefly the Indian Civil Service and 
the police, who were mainly responsible to the Governor, who 
was the agent of the Viceroy, and who could well ignore the 
ministers when such existed. The ministers, good or bad, lived on 
sufferance and dared not disobey the orders from above or even 
interfere with the discretion of the services supposed to be sub- 
ordinate to them. 

Something was done at last. Some relief was given. But a million 
had died, or two millions, or three; no one knows how many 
starved to death or died of disease during those months of horror. 
No one knows of the many more millions of emaciated boys and 
girls and little children who just escaped death then, but are 
stunted and broken in body and spirit. And still the fear of wide- 
spread famine and disease hovers over the land. 

President Roosevelt's Four Freedoms. The Freedom from 
Want. Yet rich England, and richer America, paid little heed 
to the hunger of the body that was killing millions in India, as 
they had paid little heed to the fiery thirst of the spirit that is 
consuming the people of India. Money was not needed it was 
said, and ships to carry food were scarce owing to war-time 
requirements. But in spite of governmental obstruction and desire 
to minimize the overwhelming tragedy of Bengal, sensitive and 
warm-hearted men and women in England and America and 
elsewhere came to our help. Above all, the Governments of 
China and Eire, poor in their own resources, full of their own 
difficulties, yet having had bitter experience themselves of famine 
and misery and sensing what ailed the body and spirit of India, 
gave generous help. India has a long memory, but whatever else 
she remembers or forgets, she will not forget these gracious and 
friendly acts. 

17 



The War for Democracy 

In Asia and Europe and Africa, and over the vast stretches of 
the Pacific and Atlantic and Indian Oceans, war has raged in all 
its dreadful aspects. Nearly seven years of war in China, over 
four and a half years of war in Europe and Africa, and two years 
and four months of World War. War against fascism and nazism 
and attempts to gain world dominion. Of these years of war I 
have so far spent nearly three years in prison, here and elsewhere 
in India. 

I remember how I reacted to fascism and nazism in their early 
days, and not I only, but many in India. How Japanese agres- 
sion in China had moved India deeply and revived the age-old 
friendship for China; how Italy's rape of Abyssinia had sickened 
us; how the betrayal of Czechoslovakia had hurt and embittered 
us; how the fall of Republican Spain, after a struggle full of heroic 
endurance, had been a tragedy and a personal sorrow for me and 
others. 

It was not merely the physical acts of aggression in which 
fascism and nazism indulged, not only the vulgarity and bruta- 
lity that accompanied them, terrible as they were, that affected 
us, but the principles on which they stood and which they pro- 
claimed so loudly and blatantly, the theories of life on which 
they tried to fashion themselves; for these went counter to what 
we believed in the present, and what we had held from ages past. 
And even if our racial memory had forsaken us and we had lost 
our moorings, our own experiences, even though they came to 
us in different garb, and somewhat disguised for the sake ofdecency, 
were enough to teach us to what these nazi principles and theo- 
ries of life and the state ultimately led. For our people had been 
the victims for long of those very principles and methods of govern- 
ment. So we reacted immediately and intensely against fascism 
and nazism. 

I remember how I refused a pressing invitation from Signor 
Mussolini to see him in the early days of March, 1936. Many of 
Britain's leading statesmen, who spoke harshly of the fascist Duce 
in later years when Italy became a belligerent, referred to him 
tenderly and admiringly in those days, and praised his regime 
and methods. 

Two years later, in the summer before Munich, I was invited 
on behalf of the Nazi government, to visit Germany, an invita- 
tion to which was added the remark that they knew my opposi- 
tion to nazism and yet they wanted me to see Germany for my- 
self. I could go as their guest or privately, in my own name or 
incognito, as I desired, and I would have perfect freedom to go 

18 



where I liked. Again I declined with thanks. Instead I went to 
Czechoslovakia, that 'far-away country' about which England's 
then Prime Minister knew so little. 

Before Munich I met some of the members of the British Cabi- 
net and other prominent politicians of England, and ventured 
to express my anti-fascist and anti-nazi views before them. I 
found that my views were not welcomed and I was told that there 
were many other considerations to be borne in mind. 

During the Czechoslovak crisis, what I saw of Franco-British 
statesmanship in Prague and in the Sudetenland, in London 
and Paris, and in Geneva where the League Assembly was then 
sitting, amazed and disgusted me. Appeasement seemed to be a 
feeble word for it. There was behind it not only a fear of Hitler, 
but a sneaking admiration for him. 

And now, it is a curious turn of fate's wheel that I, and people 
like me, should spend our days in prison while war against 
fascism and nazism is raging, and many of those who used to 
bow to Hitler and Mussolini, and approve of Japanese aggres- 
sion in China, should hold aloft the banner of freedom and 
democracy and anti-fascism. 

In India the change is equally remarkable. There are those 
here, as elsewhere, 'governmentarians', who hover round the 
skirts of government and echo the views which they think will 
be approved by those whose favour they continually seek. 
There was a time, not so long ago, when they praised Hitler 
and Mussolini, and held them up as models, and when they 
cursed the Soviet Union with bell, book, and candle. Not so 
now, for the weather has changed. They are high government 
and state officials, and loudly they proclaim their anti-fascism 
and anti-nazism and even talk of democracy, though with bated 
breath, as something desirable but distant. I often wonder what 
they would have done if events had taken a different turn, and 
yet there is little reason for conjecture, for they would welcome 
with garlands and addresses of welcome whoever happened to 
wield authority. 

For long years before the war my mind was full of the war that 
was coming. I thought of it, and spoke of it, and wrote about 
it, and prepared myself mentally for it. I wanted India to take 
an eager and active part in the mighty conflict, for I felt that 
high principles would be at stake, and out of this conflict would 
come great and revolutionary changes in India and the world. At 
that time I did not envisage an immediate threat to India: any 
probability of actual invasion. Yet I wanted India to take her 
full share. But I was convinced that only as a free country and 
an equal could she function in this way. 

19 



That was the attitude of the National Congress, the one great 
organization in India which consistently for all these years had 
been anti-fascist and anti-nazi, as it had been anti-imperialist. 
It had stood for Republican Spain, for Czechoslovakia, and 
throughout for China. 

And now for nearly two years the Congress has been declared 
illegal — outlawed and prevented from functioning in any way. 
The Congress is in prison. Its elected members of the provin- 
cial parliaments, its speakers of these parliaments, its ex-minis- 
ters, its mayors and presidents of municipal corporations, are 
in prison. 

Meanwhile the war goes on for democracy and the Atlantic 
Charter and the Four Freedoms. 

Time in Prison : The Urge to Action 

Time seems to change its nature in prison. The present hardly 
exists, for there is an absence of feeling and sensation which 
might separate it from the dead past. Even news of the active, 
living and dying world outside has a certain dream-like un- 
reality, an immobility and an unchangeableness as of the past. 
The outer objective time ceases to be, the inner and subjective 
sense remains, but at a lower level, except when thought pulls 
it out of the present and experiences a kind of reality in the past 
or in the future. We live, as Auguste Comte said, dead men's 
lives, encased in our pasts, but this is especially so in prison 
where we try to find some sustenance for our starved and locked- 
up emotions in memory of the past or fancies of the future. 

There is a stillness and everlastingness about the past; it 
changes not and has a touch of eternity, like a painted picture 
or a statue in bronze or marble. Unaffected by the storms and 
upheavals of the present, it maintains its dignity and repose and 
tempts the troubled spirit and the tortured mind to seek shelter 
in its vaulted catacombs. There is peace there and security, and 
one may even sense a spiritual quality. 

But it is not life, unless we can find the vital links between it 
and the present with all its conflicts and problems. It is a kind 
of art for art's sake, without the passion and the urge to action 
which are the very stuff of life. Without that passion and urge, 
there is a gradual oozing out of hope and vitality, a settling down 
on lower levels of existence, a slow merging into non-existence. 
We become prisoners of the past and some part of its immobility 
sticks to us. 

This passage of the mind is all the easier in prison where action 
20 



is denied and we become slaves to the routine of jail-life. 

Yet the past is ever with us and all that we are and that we 
have comes from the past. We are its products and we live im- 
mersed in it. Not to understand it and feel it as something living 
within us is not to understand the present. To combine it with 
the present and extend it to the future, to break from it where it 
cannot be so united, to make of all this the pulsating and vibrat- 
ing material for thought and action — that is life. 

Any vital action springs from the depths of the being. All the 
long past of the individual and even of the race has prepared 
the background for that psychological moment of action. All 
the racial memories, influences of heredity and environment 
and training, subconscious urges, thoughts and dreams and 
actions from infancy and childhood onwards, in their curious 
and tremendous mix-up, inevitably drive to that new action, 
which again becomes yet another factor influencing the future. 
Influencing the future, partly determining it, possibly even largely 
determining it, and yet, surely, it is not all determinism. 

Aurobindo Ghose writes somewhere of the present as 'the pure 
and virgin moment,' that razor's edge of time and existence which 
divides the past from the future, and is, and yet, instantaneously 
is not. The phrase is attractive and yet what does it mean? 
The virgin moment emerging from the veil of the future in all 
its naked purity, coming into contact with us, and immediately 
becoming the soiled and stale past. Is it we that soil it and violate 
it? Or is the moment not so virgin after all, for it is bound up 
with all the harlotry of the past? 

Whether there is any such thing as human freedom in the 
philosophic sense or whether there is only an automatic deter- 
minism, I do not know. A very great deal appears certainly to 
be determined by the past complex of events which bear down 
and often overwhelm the individual. Possibly even the inner 
urge that he experiences, that apparent exercise of free will, is 
itself conditioned. As Schopenhauer says, 'a man can do what 
he will, but not will as he will.' A belief in an absolute deter- 
minism seems to me to lead inevitably to complete inaction, to 
death in life. All my sense of life rebels against it, though of 
course that very rebellion may itself have been conditioned by 
previous events. 

I do not usually burden my mind with such philosophical or 
metaphysical problems, which escape solution. Sometimes they 
come to me almost unawares in the long silences of prison, or 
even in the midst of an intensity of action, bringing with them 
a sense of detachment or consolation in the face of some painful 
experience. But usually it is action and the thought of action 

21 



vhat fill me, and when action is denied, I imagine that I am 
preparing for action. 

The call of action has long been witn me; not action divorced 
from thought, but rather flowing from it in one continuous 
sequence. And when, rarely, there has been full harmony bet- 
ween the two, thought leading to action and finding its fulfil- 
ment in it, action leading back to thought and a fuller under- 
standing — then I have sensed a certain fullness of life and a vivid 
intensity in that moment of existence. But such moments are rare, 
very rare, and usually one outstrips the other and there is a lack 
of harmony, and vain effort to bring the two in line. There was 
a time, many years ago, when I lived for considerable periods 
in a state of emotional exaltation, wrapped up in the action 
which absorbed me. Those days of my youth seem far away now, 
not merely because of the passage of years but far more so be- 
cause of the ocean of experience and painful thought that sepa- 
rates them from to-day. The old exuberance is much less now, 
the almost uncontrollable impulses have toned down, and passion 
and feeling are more in check. The burden of thought is often 
a hindrance, and in the mind where there was once certainty, 
doubt creeps in. Perhaps it is just age, or the common temper of 
our day. 

And yet, even now, the call of action stirs strange depths within 
me, and often a brief tussle with thought. I want to experience 
again 'that lonely impulse of delight' which turns to risk and 
danger and faces and mocks at death. I am not enamoured of 
death, though I do not think it frightens me. I do not believe in 
the negation of or abstention from life. I have loved life and it 
attracts me still and, in my own way, I seek to experience it, 
though many invisible barriers have grown up which surround 
me; but that very desire leads me to play with life, to peep over 
its edges, not to be a slave to it, so that we may value each other 
all the more. Perhaps I ought to have been an aviator, so that 
when the slowness and dullness of life overcame me I could have 
rushed into the tumult of the clouds and said to myself: 

'/ balanced all, brought all to mind, 

The years to come seemed waste of breath, 
A waste of breath the years behind, 
In balance with this life, this death. " 

The Past in its Relation to the Present 

This urge to action, this desire to experience life through action, 
has influenced all my thought and activity. Even sustained think- 

22 



ing, apart from being itself a kind of action, becomes part of the 
action to come. It is not something entirely abstract, in the void, 
unrelated to action and life. The past becomes something that 
leads up to the present, the moment of action, the future some- 
thing that flows from it; and all three are inextricably inter- 
twined and interrelated. 

Even my seemingly actionless life in prison is tacked on some- 
how, by some process of thought and feeling, to coming or ima- 
gined action, and so it gains for me a certain content without 
which it would be a vacuum in which existence would become 
intolerable. When actual action has been denied me I have sought 
some such approach to the past and to history. Because my own 
personal experiences have often touched historic events and some- 
times I have even had something to do with the influencing of 
such events in my own sphere, it has not been difficult for me 
to envisage history as a living process with which I could identify 
myself to some extent. 

I came late to history and, even then, not through the usual 
direct road of learning a mass of facts and dates and drawing 
conclusions and inferences from them, unrelated to my life's 
course. So long as I did this, history had little significance for 
me. I was still less interested in the supernatural or problems of 
a future life. Science and the problems of to-day and of our pre- 
sent life attracted me far more. 

Some mixture of thought and emotion and urges, of which I 
was only dimly conscious, led me to action, and action, in its turn, 
sent me back to thought and a desire to understand the present. 

The roots of that present lay in the past and so I made voyages 
of discovery into the past, ever seeking a clue in it, if any such 
existed, to the understanding of the present. The domination of 
the present never left me even when I lost myself in musings of 
past, events and of persons far away and long ago, forgetting 
where or what I was. If I felt occasionally that I belonged to the 
past. I felt also that the whole of the past belonged to me in the 
present. Past history merged into contemporary history: it be- 
came a living reality tied up with sensations of pain and pleasure. 

If the past had a tendency to become the present, the present 
also sometimes receded into the distant past and assumed its 
immobile, statuesque appearance. In the midst of an intensity of 
action itself, there would suddenly come a feeling as if it was 
some past event and one was looking at it, as it were, in retrospect. 

It was this attempt to -discover the past in its relation to the 
present that led me twelve years ago to write Glimpses of World 
History in the form of letters to my daughter. I wrote rather 
superficially and as simply as I could, for I was writing for a girl 

23 



in her early teens, but behind that writing lay that quest and 
voyage of discovery. A sense of adventure filled me and I lived 
successively different ages and periods and had for companions 
men and women who had lived long ago. I had leisure in jail, 
there was no sense of hurry or of completing a task within an 
allotted period of time, so I let my mind wander or take root for 
a while, keeping in tune with my mood, allowing impression to 
sink in and fill the dry bones of the past with flesh and blood. 

It was a similar quest, though limited to recent and more 
intimate times and persons, that led me later to write my auto- 
biography. 

I suppose I have changed a good deal during these twelve 
years. I have grown more contemplative. There is perhaps a 
little more poise and equilibrium, some sense of detachment, a 
greater calmness of spirit. I am not overcome now to the same 
extent as I used to be by tragedy or what I conceived to be 
tragedy. The turmoil and disturbance are less and are more 
temporary, even though the tragedies have been on a far greater 
scale. 

Is this, I have wondered, the growth of a spirit of resignation, 
or is it a toughening of the texture ? Is it just age and a lessening 
of vitality and of the passion of life? Or is it due to long periods 
in prison and life slowly ebbing away, and the thoughts that fill 
the mind passing through, after a brief stay, leaving only ripples 
behind ? The tortured mind seeks some mechanism of escape, 
the senses get dulled from repeated shocks, and a feeling comes 
over one that so much evil and misfortune shadow the world 
that a little more or less does not make much difference. There 
is only one thing that remains to us that cannot be taken awa/: 
to act with courage and dignity and to stick to the ideals that 
have given meaning to life; but that is not the politician's way. 

Someone said the other day: death is the birthright of every 
person born — a curious way of putting an obvious thing. It is a 
birthright which nobody has denied or can deny, and which all 
of us seek to forget and escape so long as we may. And yet there 
was something novel and attractive about the phrase. Those who 
complain so bitterly of life have always a way out of it, if they 
so choose. That is always in our power to achieve. If we cannot 
master life we can at least master death. A pleasing thought 
lessening the feeling of helplessness. 

Life's Philosophy 

Six or seven years ago an American publisher asked me to write 
an essay on my philosophy of life for a symposium he was prepar- 
ing. I was attracted to the idea but I hesitated, and the more 

24 



I thought over it, the more reluctant I grew. Ultimately, I did 
not write that essay. 

What was my philosophy of life? I did not know. Some years 
earlier I would not have been so hesitant. There was a definite- 
ness about my thinking and objectives then which has faded 
away since. The events of the past few years in India, China, 
Europe, and all over the world have been confusing, upsetting 
and distressing, and the future has become vague and shadowy 
and has lost that clearness of outline which it once possessed in 
my mind. 

This doubt and difficulty about fundamental matters did not 
come in my way in regard to immediate action, except that it 
blunted somewhat the sharp edge of that activity. No longer 
could I function, as I did in my younger days, as an arrow flying 
automatically to the target of my choice ignoring all else but 
that target. Yet I functioned, for the urge to action was there and 
a real or imagined co-ordination of that action with the ideals I 
held. But a growing distaste for politics as I saw them seized me 
and gradually my whole attitude to life seemed to undergo a 
transformation. 

The ideals and objectives of yesterday were still the ideals of 
to-day, but they had lost some of their lustre and, even as one 
seemed to go towards them, they lost the shining beauty which 
had warmed the heart and vitalized the body. Evil triumphed 
often enough, but what was far worse was the coarsening and 
distortion of what had seemed so right. Was human nature so 
essentially bad that it would take ages of training, through 
suffering and misfortune, before it could behave reasonably and 
raise man above that creature of lust and violence and deceit 
that he now was? And, meanwhile, was every effort to change 
it radically in the present or the near future doomed to failure? 

Ends and means: were they tied up inseparably, acting and 
reacting on each other, the wrong means distorting and some- 
times even destroying the end in view? But the right means 
might well be beyond the capacity of infirm and selfish human 
nature. 

What then was one to do? Not to act was a complete con- 
fession of failure and a submission to evil; to act meant often 
enough a compromise with some form of that evil, with all the 
untoward consequences that such compromises result in. 

My early approach to life's problems had been more or less 
scientific, with something of the easy optimism of the science 
of the nineteenth and early twentieth century. A secure and 
comfortable existence and the energy and self-confidence I 
possessed increased that feeling of optimism. A kind of vague 
humanism appealed to me. 

25 



Religion, as I saw it practised, and accepted even by thinking 
minds, whether it was Hinduism or Islam or Buddhism or Chris- 
tianity, did not attract me. It seemed to be closely associated 
with superstitious practices and dogmatic beliefs, and behind it 
lay a method of approach to life's problems which was certainly 
not that of science. There was an element of magic about it, an 
uncritical credulousness, a reliance on the supernatural. 

Yet it was obvious that religion had supplied some deeply felt 
inner need of human nature, and that the vast majority of 
people all over the world could not do without some form of 
religious belief. It had produced many fine types of men and 
women, as well as bigoted, narrow-minded, cruel tyrants. It had 
given a set of values to humar life, and though some of these 
values had no application to-day, or were even harmful, others 
were still the foundation of morality and ethics. 

In the wider sense of the word, religion dealt with the un- 
charted regions of human experience, uncharted, that is, by the 
scientific positive knowledge of the day. In a sense it might be 
considered an extension of the known and charted region, though 
the methods of science and religion were utterly unlike each 
other, and to a large extent they had to deal with different kinds 
of media. It was obvious that there was a vast unknown region 
all around us, and science, with its magnificent achievements, 
knew Httlc enough about it, though it was making tentative 
approaches in that direction. Probably also, the normal methods 
of science, its dealings with the visible world and the processes 
of life, were not wholly adapted to the physical, the artistic, the 
spiritual, and other elements of the invisible world. Life does 
not consist entirely of what we see and hear and feel, the visible 
world which is undergoing change in time and space; it is con- 
tinually touching an invisible world of other, and possibly more 
stable or equally changeable elements, and no thinking person 
can ignore this invisible world. 

Science does not tell us much, or for the matter of that any- 
thing about the purpose of life. It is now widening its boun- 
daries and it may invade the so-called invisible world before 
long and help us to understand this purpose of life in its widest 
sense, or at least give us some glimpses which illumine the pro- 
blem of human existence. The old controversy between science 
and religion takes a new form — the application of the scientific 
method to emotional and religious experiences. 

Religion merges into mysticism and metaphysics and philo- 
sophy. There have been great mystics, attractive figures, who 
cannot easily be disposed of as self-deluded fools. Yet mysticism 
(in the narrow sense of the word) irritates me; it appears to be 

26 



vague and soft and flabby, not a rigorous discipline of the mind 
but a surrender of mental faculties and a living in a sea of 
emotional experience. • The experience may lead occasionally 
to some insight into inner and less obvious processes, but it is 
also likely to lead to self-delusion. 

Metaphysics and philosophy, or a metaphysical philosophy, 
have a greater appeal to the mind. They require hard thinking 
and the application of logic and reasoning, though all this is 
necessarily based on some premises, which are presumed to be 
self-evident, and yet which may or may not be true. All think- 
ing persons, to a greater or less degree, dabble in metaphysics 
and philosophy, for not to do so is to ignore many of the aspects 
of this universe of ours. Some may feel more attracted to them 
than others, and the emphasis on them may vary in different 
ages. In the ancient world, both in Asia and Europe, all the 
emphasis was laid on the supremacy of the inward life over 
things external, and this inevitably led to metaphysics and 
philosophy. The modern man is wrapped up much more in 
these things external, and yet even be, in moments of crisis and 
mental trouble often turn. to philosophy and metaphysical 
speculations. 

Some vague or more precise philosophy of life we all have, 
though most of us accept unthinkingly the general attitude which 
is characteristic of our generation and environment. Most of 
us accept also certain metaphysical conceptions as part of the 
faith in which we have grown up. I have not been attracted 
towards metaphysics; in fact, I have had a certain distaste for 
vague speculation. And yet I have sometimes found a certain 
intellectual fascination in trying to follow the rigid lines of 
metaphysical and philosophic thought of the ancients or the 
moderns. But I have never felt at case there and have escaped 
from their spell with a feeling of relief. 

Essentially, I am interested in this world, in this life, not in 
some other world or a future life. Whether there is such a thing 
as a soul, or whether there is a survival after death or not, I do 
not know; and, important as these questions are, they do not 
trouble me in the least. The environment in which I have 
grown up takes the soul (or rather the alma) and a future life, 
the Karma theory of cause and effect, and reincarnation for 
granted. I have been affected by this and so, in a sense, I am 
favourably disposed towards these assumptions. There might be 
a soul which survives the physical death of the body, and a theory 
of cause and effect governing life's actions seems reasonable, 
though it leads to obvious difficulties when one thinks of the 
ultimate cause. Presuming a soul, there appears to be some logic 
also in the theory of reincarnation. 

27 



But I do not believe in any of these or other theories and 
assumptions as a matter of religious faith. They are just intel- 
lectual speculations in an unknown region about which we know 
next to nothing. They do not affect my life, and whether they 
were proved right or wrong subsequently, they would make little 
difference to me. 

Spiritualism with its seances and its so-called manifestations 
of spirits and the like has always seemed to me a rather absurd 
and impertinent way of investigating psychic phenomena and 
the mysteries of the after-life. Usually it is something worse, 
and is an exploitation of the emotions of some over-credulous 
people who seek relief or escape from mental trouble. I do not 
deny the possibility of some of these psychic phenomena having 
a basis of truth, but the approach appears to me to be all wrong 
and the conclusions drawn from scraps and odd bits of evidence 
to be unjustified. 

Often, as I look at this world, I have a sense of mysteries, of 
unknown depths. The urge to understand it, in so far as I can, 
comes to me: to be in tune with it and to experience it in its 
fullness. But the way to that understanding seems to me essen- 
tially the way of science, the way of objective approach, though 
I realise that there can be no such thing as true objectiveness. 
If the subjective element is unavoidable and inevitable, it should 
be conditioned as far as possible by the scientific method. 

What the mysterious is I do not know. I do not call it God 
because God has come to mean much that I do not believe in. 
I find myself incapable of thinking of a deity or of any unknown 
supreme power in anthropomorphic terms, and the fact that 
many people think so is continually a source of surprise to me. 
Any idea of a personal God seems very odd to me. Intellectually, 
I can appreciate to some extent the conception of monism, and 
I have been attracted towards the Advaita (non-dualist) philo- 
sophy of the Vedanta, though I do not presume to understand 
it in all its depth and intricacy, and I realise that merely an 
intellectual appreciation of such matters does not carry one 
far. At the same time the Vedanta, as well as other similar 
approaches, rather frighten me with their vague, formless incur- 
sions into infinity. The diversity and fullness of nature stir me 
and produce a harmony of the spirit, and I can imagine myself 
feeling at home in the old Indian or Greek pagan and pantheis 
tic atmosphere, but minus the conception of God or Gods that 
was attached to it. 

Some kind of ethical approach to life has a strong appeal for 
me, though it would be difficult for me to justify it logically. 
I have been attracted by Gandhiji's stress on right means and 
I think one of his greatest contributions to our public life has 

28 



been, this emphasis. The idea is by no means new, but this 
application of an ethical doctrine to large-scale public activity 
was certainly novel. It is full of difficulty, and perhaps ends and 
means are not really separable but form together one organic 
whole. In a world which thinks almost exclusively of ends and 
ignores means, this emphasis on means seems odd and remark- 
able. How far it has succeeded in India I cannot say. But there 
is no doubt that it has created a deep and abiding impression 
on the minds of large numbers of people. 

A study of Marx and Lenin produced a powerful effect on 
my mind and helped me to see history and current affairs in 
a new light. The long chain of history and of social develop- 
ment appeared to have some meaning, some sequence, and the 
future lost some of its obscurity. The practical achievements 
of the Soviet Union were also tremendously impressive. Often 
I disliked or did not understand some development there and 
it seemed to me to be too closely concerned with the oppor- 
tunism of the moment or the power politics of the day. But 
despite all these developments and possible distortions of the 
original passion for human betterment, I had no doubt that the 
Soviet Revolution had advanced human society by a great leap 
and had lit a bright flame which could not be smothered, and 
that it had laid the foundations for that new civilization towards 
which the world could advance. I am too much of an indivi- 
dualist and believer in personal freedom to like overmuch regi- 
mentation. Yet it seemed to me obvious that in a complex social 
structure individual freedom had to be limited, and perhaps 
the only way to read personal freedom was through some such 
limitation in the social sphere. The lesser liberties may often 
need limitation in the interest of the larger freedom. 

Much in the Marxist philosophical outlook I could accept 
without difficulty: its monism and non-duality of mind and 
matter, the dynamics of matter and the dialectic of continuous 
change by evolution as well as leap, through action and inter- 
action, cause and effect, thesis, antithesis and synthesis. It did 
not satisfy me completely, nor did it answer all the questions 
in my mind, and, almost unawares, a vague idealist approach 
would creep into my mind, something rather akin to the Vedanta 
approach. It was not a difference between mind and matter, 
but rather of something that lay beyond the mind. Also there 
was the background of ethics. I realised that the moral approach 
is a changing one and depends upon the growing mind and an 
advancing civilization; it is conditioned by the mental climate 
of the age. Yet there was something more to it than that, certain 
basic urges which had greater permanence. I did not like the 
frequent divorce in communist, as in other, practice between 

29 



action and these basic urges or principles. So there was an odd 
mixture in my mind which I could not rationally explain or 
resolve. There was a general tendency not to think too much of 
those fundamental questions which appear to be beyond reach, 
but rather to concentrate on the problems of life — to understand 
in the narrower and more immediate sense what should be done 
and how. Whatever ultimate reality may be, and whether we 
can ever grasp it in whole or in part, there certainly appear to 
be vast possibilities of increasing human knowledge, even though 
this may be partly or largely subjective, and of applying this to 
the advancement and betterment of human living and social 
organization. 

There has been in the past, and there is to a lesser extent 
even to-day among some people, an absorption in finding an 
answer to the riddle of the universe. This leads them away from 
the individual and social problems of the day, and when they 
are unable to solve that riddle they despair and turn to inaction 
and triviality, or find comfort in some dogmatic creed. Social 
evils, most of which are certainly capable of removal, are attri- 
buted to original sin, to the unalterableness of human natu-e, 
or the social structure, or (in India) to the inevitable legacy 
of previous births. Thus one drifts away from even the attempt 
to think rationally and scientifically and takes refuge in irra- 
tionalism, superstition, and unreasonable and inequitable social 
prejudices and practices. It is true that even rational and scien- 
tific thought does not always take us as far as we would like to 
go. There is an infinite number of factors and relations all of 
which influence and determine events in varying degrees. It is 
impossible to grasp all of them, but we can try to pick out the 
dominating forces at work and by observing external material 
reality, and by experiment and practice, trial and error, grope 
our way to ever-widening knowledge and truth. 

For this purpose, and within these limitations, the general 
Marxist approach, fitting in as it more or less does with the 
present state of scientific knowledge, seemed to me to offer con- 
siderable help. But even accepting that approach, the con- 
sequences that flow from it and the interpretation on past and 
present happenings were by no means always clear. Marx's 
general analysis of social development seems to have been re- 
markably correct, and yet many developments took place later 
which did not fit in with his outlook for the immediate future. 
Lenin successfully adapted the Marxian thesis to some of these 
subsequent developments, and again since then further remark- 
able changes have taken place — the rise of fascism and nazism 
and all that lay behind them. The very rapid growth of techno- 
logy and the practical application of vast developments in 

30 



scientific knowledge are now changing the world picture with an 
amazing rapidity, leading to new problems. 

And so while I accepted the fundamentals of the socialist 
theory, I did not trouble myself about its numerous inner con- 
troversies. I had little patience with leftist groups in India, 
spending much of their energy in mutual conflict and recrimi- 
nation over fine points of doctrine which did not interest me 
at all. Life is too complicated and, as far as we can understand 
it in our present state of knowledge, too illogical, for it to be 
confined within the four corners of a fixed doctrine. 

The real problems for me remain problems of individual and 
social life, of harmonious living, of a proper balancing of an 
individual's inner and outer life, of an adjustment of the rela- 
tions between individuals and between groups, of a continuous 
becoming something better and higher of social development, 
of the ceaseless adventure of man. In the solution of these pro- 
blems the way of observation and precise knowledge and deli- 
berate reasoning, according to the method of science, must be 
followed. This method may not always be applicable in our 
quest of truth, for art and poetry and certain psychic experi- 
ences seem to belong to a different order of things and to elude 
the objective methods of science. Let us, therefore, not rule 
out intuition and other methods of sensing truth and reality. 
They are necessary even for the purposes of science. But always 
we must hold to our anchor of precise objective knowledge tested 
by reason, and even more so by experiment and practice, and 
always we must beware of losing ourselves in a sea of specula- 
tion unconnected with the day-to-day problems of life and the 
needs of men and women. A living philosophy must answer 
the problems of to-day. 

It may be that we of this modern age, who so pride ourselves 
on the achievements of our times, are prisoners of our age, just 
as the ancients and the men and women of medieval times were 
prisoners of their respective ages. We may delude ourselves, 
as others have done before us, that our way of looking at things 
is the only right way, leading to truth. We cannot escape from 
that prison or get rid entirely of that illusion, if illusion it is. 

Yet I am convinced that the methods and approach of science 
have revolutionized human life more than anything else in the 
long course of history, and have opened doors and avenues of 
further and even more radical change, leading up to the very 
portals of what has long been considered the unknown. The 
technical achievements of science are obvious enough: its capa- 
city to transform an economy of scarcity into one of abundance 
is evident, its invasion of many problems which have so far 
been the monopoly of philosophy is becoming more pronounced. 

31 



Space-time and the quantum theory utterly changed the 
picture of the physical world. More recent researches into the 
nature of matter, the structure of the atom, the transmutation 
of the elements, and the transformation of electricity and light, 
either into the other, have carried human knowledge much 
further. Man no longer sees nature as something apart and dis- 
tinct from himself. Human destiny appears to become a part 
of nature's rhythmic energy. 

All this upheaval of thought, due to the advance of science, 
has led scientists into a new region, verging on the metaphysi- 
cal. They draw different and often contradictory conclusions. 
Some see in it a new unity, the antithesis of chance. Others, like 
Bertrand Russell, say, 'Academic philosophers ever since the 
time of Parmenides have believed the world is unity. The most 
fundamental of my beliefs is that this is rubbish.' Or again, 
'Man is the product of causes which had no prevision of the 
end they were achieving; his origin, his growth, his hopes and 
fears, his loves and beliefs are but the outcome of accidental 
collocations of atoms.' And yet the latest developments in phy- 
sics have gone a long way to demonstrate a fundamental unity 
in nature. 'The belief that all things are made of a single sub- 
stance is as old as thought itself; but ours is the generation which, 
first of all in history, is able to receive the unity of nature, not as 
a baseless dogma or a hopeless aspiration, but a principle of science 
based on proof as sharp and clear as anything which is known.'* 

Old as this belief is in Asia and Europe, it is interesting to 
compare some of the latest conclusions of science with the fun- 
damental ideas underlying the Advaita Vedantic theory. These 
ideas were that the universe is made of one substance whose 
form is perpetually changing, and further that the sum-total of 
energies remains always the same. Also that 'the explanations of 
things are to be found within their own nature, and that no external 
beings or existences are required to explain what is going on in the 
universe,' with its corollary of a self-evolving universe. 

It does not very much matter to science what these vague 
speculations lead to, for meanwhile it forges ahead in a hundred 
directions, in its own precise experimental way of observation, 
widening the bounds of the charted region of knowledge, and 
changing human life in the process. Science may be on the verge 
of discovering vital mysteries, which yet may elude it. Still it 
will go on along its appointed path, for there is no end to its 
journeying. Ignoring for the moment the 'why?' of philosophy, 
science will go on asking 'how?', and as it finds this oul it gives 
greater content and meaning to life, and perhaps takes us some 
way to answering the 'why?'. 

*Karl K. Darrow. 'The Renaissance of Physics' (New York, 1936), p. 301. 

32 



Or, perhaps, we cannot cross that barrier, and the mysterious 
will continue to remain the mysterious, and life with all its 
changes will still remain a bundle of good and evil, a succes- 
sion of conflicts, a curious combination of incompatible and 
mutually hostile urges. 

Or again, perhaps, the very progress of science, unconnected 
with and isolated from moral discipline and ethical considera- 
tions, will lead to the concentration of power and the terrible 
instruments of destruction which it has made, in the hands of 
evil and selfish men, seeking the domination of others — and 
thus to the destruction of its own great achievements. Something 
of this kind we see happening now, and behind this war there 
lies this internal conflict of the spirit of man. 

How amazing is this spirit of man! In spite of innumerable 
failings, man, throughout the ages, has sacrificed his life and 
all he held dear for an ideal, for truth, for faith, for country and 
honour. That ideal may change, but that capacity for self- 
sacrifice continues, and, because of that, much may be forgiven 
to man, and it is impossible to lose hope for him. In the midst 
of disaster, he has not lost his dignity or his faith in the values 
he cherished. Plaything of nature's mighty forces, less than a 
speck of dust in this vast universe, he has hurled defiance at the 
elemental powers, and with his mind, cradle of revolution, sought 
to master them. Whatever gods there be, there is something 
godlike in man, as there is also something of the devil in him. 

The future is dark, uncertain. But we can see part of the 
way leading to it and can tread it with firm steps, remembering 
that nothing that can happen is likely to overcome the spirit 
of man which has survived so many perils; remembering also 
that life, for all its ills, has joy and beauty, and that we can 
always wander; if we know how to, in the enchanted woods of 
nature. 

'What else is wisdom? What of man's endeavour 
Or God's high grace, so lovely and so great? 
To stand from fear set free, to breathe and wait; 
To hold a hand uplifted over Hate; 
And shall not Loveliness be loved for ever?* 

The Burden of the Past 

The twenty-first month of my imprisonment is well on its way; 
the moon waxes and wanes and soon two years will have been 
completed. Another birthday will come round to remind me 
that I am getting older; my last four birthdays I have spent in 
prison, here and in Dehra Dun Jail, and many others in the 

* Chorus from 'The Bacchae of Euripides. Gilbert Murray's translation. 

33 



course of my previous terms of imprisonment. I have lost count 
of their number. 

During all these months I have often thought of writing, felt 
the urge to it and at the same time a reluctance. My friends took 
it for granted that I would write and produce another book, as 
I had done during previous terms of imprisonment. It had almost 
become a habit. 

Yet I did not write. There was a certain distaste for just 
throwing out a book which had no particular significance. It 
was easy enough to write, but to write something that was worth 
while was another matter, something that would not grow stale 
while I sat in prison with my manuscript and the world went 
on changing. I would not be writing for to-day or to-morrow 
but for an unknown and possibly distant future. For -whom 
would I write? and for when? Perhaps what I wrote would 
never be published, for the years 1 would spend in prison were 
likely to witness even greater convulsions and conflicts than the 
years of war that are already over. India herself might be a 
battle-ground or there might be civil commotion. 

And, even if we escaped all these possible developments, it 
was a risky adventure to write now for a future date, when the 
problems of to-day might be dead and buried and new problems 
arisen in their place. I could not think of this World War as 
just another war, only bigger and greater. From the day it broke 
out, and even earlier, I was full of premonitions of vast and 
cataclysmic changes, of a new world arising for better or for 
worse. What would my poor writing of a past and vanished age 
be worth then? 

All these thoughts troubled and restrained me, and behind 
them lay deeper questions in the recesses of my mind, to which 
I could find no easy answer. 

Similar thoughts and difficulties came to me during my last 
term of imprisonment, from October, 1940, to December, 1941, 
mostly spent in my old cell of Dehra Dun Jail, where six years 
earlier I had begun writing my autobiography. For ten months 
there I could not develop the mood for writing, and, I spent" 
my time in reading or in digging and playing about with soil 
and flowers. Ultimately I did write: it was meant to be a con- 
tinuation of my autobiography. For a few weeks I wrote rapidly 
and continuously, but before my task was finished I was sud- 
denly discharged, long before the end of my four-year term of 
imprisonment. 

It was fortunate that I had not finished what I had under- 
taken, for if I had done so I might have been induced to send 
it to a publisher. Looking at it now, I realise its little worth; 

34 



how stale and uninteresting much of it seems. The incidents it 
deals with have lost all importance and have become the debris 
of a half-forgotten past, covered over by the lava of subsequent 
volcanic eruptions. I have lost interest in them. What stand out 
in my mind are personal experiences which had left their impress 
upon me; contacts with certain individuals and certain events; 
contacts with the crowd — the mass of the Indian people, in their 
infinite diversity and yet their amazing unity; some adventures 
of the mind; waves of unhappiness and the relief and joy that 
came from overcoming them; the exhilaration of the moment 
of action. About much of this one may not write. There is an 
intimacy about one's inner life, one's feelings and thoughts, 
which may not and cannot be conveyed to others. Yet those 
contacts, personal and impersonal, mean much; they affect the 
individual and mould him and change his reactions to life, to 
his own country, to other nations. 

As in other prisons, here also in Ahmadnager Fort, I took to 
gardening and spent many hours daily, even when the sun was 
hot, in digging and preparing beds for flowers. The soil was 
very bad, stony, full of debris and remains of previous building 
operations, and even the ruins of ancient monuments. For this 
is a place of history, of many a battle and palace intrigue in the 
past. That history is not very old, as Indian history goes, nor 
is it very important in the larger scheme of things. But one 
incident stands out and is still remembered: the courage of a 
beautiful woman, Chand Bibi, who defended this fort and led 
her forces, sword in hand, against the imperial armies of Akbar. 
She was murdered by one of her own men. 

Digging in this unfortunate soil, we have come across parts 
of ancient walls and the tops of domes and buildings buried far 
underneath the surface of the ground. We could not go far, 
as deep digging and archaeological explorations were not approv- 
ed by authority, nor did we have the wherewithal to carry this 
on. Once we came across a lovely lotus carved in stone on the 
side of a wall, probably over a doorway. 

I remembered another and a less happy discovery in Dehra 
Dun Jail. In the course of digging in my little yard, three years 
ago, I came across a curious relic of past days. Deep under the 
surface of the ground, the remains of two ancient piles were 
uncovered and we viewed them with some excitement. They 
were part of the old gallows that had functioned there thirty 
or forty years earlier. The jail had long ceased to be a place of 
execution and all visible signs of the old gallows-tree had been 
removed. We had discovered and uprooted its foundations, and 
all my fellow-prisoners, who had helped in this process, rejoiced 
that we had put away at last this thing of ill omen. 

35 



Now I have put away my spade and taken to the pen instead. 
Possibly what I write now will meet the same fate as my un- 
finished manuscript of Dehra Dun Jail. I cannot write about the 
present so long as I am not free to experience it through action. 
It is the need for action in the present that brings it vividly 
to me, and then I can write about it with ease and a certain 
facility. In prison it is something vague, shadowy, something 
I cannot come to grips with, or experience as the sensation of 
the moment. It ceases to be the present for me in any real sense 
of the word, and yet it is not the past either, with the past's 
immobility and statuesque calm. 

Nor can I assume the role of a prophet and write about the 

future. My mind often thinks of it and tries to pierce its veil 

and clothe it in the garments of my choice. But these are vain 

imaginings and the future remains uncertain, unknown, and 

there is no assurance that it will not betray again our hopes and 

prove false to humanity's dreams. 

The past remains; but I cannot write academically of past 
events in the manner of a historian or scholar. I have not that 
knowledge or equipment or training; nor do I possess the mood 
for that kind of work. The past oppresses me or fills me some- 
times with its warmth when it touches on the present, and be- 
comes, as it were, an aspect of that living present. If it does not 
do so, then it is cold, barren, lifeless, uninteresting. I can only 
write about it, as I have previously done, by bringing it in some 
relation to my present-day thoughts and activities, and then this 
writing of history, as Goethe once said, brings some relief from 
the weight and burden of the past. It is, I suppose, a process 
similar to that of psychoanalysis, but applied to a race or to 
humanity itself instead of to an individual. 

The burden of the past, the burden of both good and ill, is 
over-powering, and sometimes suffocating, more especially for 
those of us who belong to ve.ry ancient civilizations like those 
of India and China. As Nietzsche says: 'Not only the wisdom of 
centuries — also their madness breaketh out in us. Dangerous 
is it to be an heir.' 

What is my inheritance? To what am I an heir? To all that 
humanity has achieved during tens of thousands of years, to all 
that it has thought and felt and suffered and taken pleasure in, 
to its cries of triumph and its bitter agony of defeat, to that 
astonishing adventure of man which began so long ago and yet 
continues and beckons to us. To all this and more, in common 
with all men. But there is a special heritage for those of us of 
India, not an exclusive one, for none is exclusive and all are 
common to the race of man, one more especially applicable to 

36 



us, something that is in our flesh and blood and bones, that has 
gone to make us what we are and what we are likely to be. 

It is the thought of this particular heritage and its applica- 
tion to the present that has long filled my mind, and it is about 
this that I should like to write, though the difficulty and com- 
plexity of the subject appal me and I can only touch the surface 
of it. I cannot do justice to it, but in attempting it I might be 
able to do some justice to myself by clearing my own mind and 
preparing it for the next stages of thought and action. 

Inevitably, my approach will often be a personal one; how 
the idea grew in my mind, what shapes it took, how it influenced 
me and affected my action. There will also be some entirely 
personal experiences which have nothing to do with the subject 
in its wider aspects, but which coloured my mind and influ- 
enced my approach to the whole problem. Our judgments of 
countries and peoples are based on many factors; among them 
our personal contacts, if there have been any, have a marked 
influence. If we do not personally know the people of a country 
we are apt to misjudge them even more than otherwise, and to 
consider them entirely alien and different. 

In the case of our own country our personal contacts are 
innumerable, and through such contacts many pictures or some 
kind of composite picture of our countrymen form in our mind. 
So I have filled the picture gallery of my mind. There are some 
portraits, vivid, life-like, looking down upon me and reminding 
me of some of life's high points — and yet it all seems so long 
ago and like some story I have read. There are many other 
pictures round which are wrapped memories of old comradeship 
and the friendship that sweetens life. And there are innumer- 
able pictures of the mass — Indian men and women and children, 
all crowded together, looking up at me, and I trying to fathom 
what lie behind those thousands of eyes of theirs. 

I shall begin this story with an entirely personal chapter, for 
this gives the clue to my mood in the month immediately fol- 
lowing the period I have written about towards the end of my 
autobiography. But this is not going to be another autobiogra- 
phy, though I am afraid the personal element will often be present. 
The World War goes on. Sitting here in Ahmadnagar Fort, a 
prisoner perforce inactive when a fierce activity consumes the 
world, I fret a little sometimes and I think of the big things and 
brave ventures which have filled my mind these many years. I 
try to view the war impersonally as one would look at some ele- 
mental phenomenon, some catastrophe of nature, a great earth- 
quake or a flood. I do not succeed of course. But there seems 
no other way if I am to protect myself from too much hurt and 
hatred and excitement. And in this mighty manifestation of 

37 



savage and destructive nature my own troubles and self sink into 
insignificance. 

I remember the words that Gandhiji said on that fateful evening 
of August 8th, 1942: 'We must look the world in the face with 
calm and clear eyes even though the eyes of the world are blood- 
shot to-day.' 



38 



CHAPTER TWO 

BADENWEILER, LAUSANNE 
Kamala 



ON SEPTEMBER 4tH, 1935, I WAS SUDDENLY RELEASED FROM THE 

mountain jail of Almora, for news had come that my wife was 
in a critical condition. She was far away in a sanatorium at 
Badenweiler in the Black Forest of Germany. I hurried by 
automobile and train to Allahabad, reaching there the next day, 
and the same afternoon I started on the air journey to Europe. 
The air liner took me to Karachi and Baghdad and Cairo, and 
from Alexandria a seaplane carried me to Brindisi. From Brindisi 
I went by train to Basle in Switzerland. I reached Badenweiler 
on the evening of September 9th, four days after I had left Allaha- 
bad and five days after my release from Almora jail. 

There was the same old brave smile on Kamala's face when I 
saw her, but she was too weak and too much in the grip of pain 
to say much. Perhaps my arrival made a difference, for she was 
a little better the next day and for some days after. But the crisis 
continued and slowly drained the life out of her. Unable to 
accustom myself to the thought of her death, I imagined that 
she was improving and that if she could only survive that crisis 
she might get well. The doctors, as is their way, gave me hope. 
The immediate crisis seemed to pass and she held her ground. 
She was never well enough for a long conversation. We talked 
briefly and I would stop as soon as I noticed that she was getting 
tired. Sometimes I read to her. Qne of the books I remember 
reading out to her in this way was Pearl Buck's 'The Good Earth*. 
She liked my doing this, but our progress was slow. 

Morning and afternoon I trudged from my ptnsiort in the 
little town to the sanatorium and spent a few hours with her. 
I was full of the many things I wanted to tell her and yet I had 
to restrain myself. Sometimes we talked a little of old times, 
old memories, of common friends in India; sometimes, a little 
wistfully, of the future and what we would do then. In spite 
of her serious condition she clung to the future. Her eyes were 
bright and vital, her face usually cheerful. Odd friends who 
came to visit her were pleasantly surprised to find her looking 

39 



better than they had imagined. They were misled by those 
bright eyes and that smiling face. 

In the long autumn evenings I sat by myself in my room in 
the penfwn, where I was staying, or sometimes went out for a walk 
across the fields or through the forest. A hundred pictures of 
Kamala succeeded each other in my mind, a hundred aspects 
of her rich and deep personality. We had been married for nearly 
twenty years, and yet how many times she had surprised me by 
something new in her mental or spiritual make-up. I had known 
her in so many ways and, in later years, I had tried my utmost 
to understand her. That understanding had not been denied 
to me, but I often wondered if I really knew her or understood 
her. There was something elusive about her, something fay-like, 
real but unsubstantial, difficult to grasp. Sometimes, looking 
into her eyes, I would find a stranger peeping out at me. 

Except for a little schooling, she had had no formal education; 
her mind had not gone through the educational process. She 
came to us as an unsophisticated girl, apparently with hardly 
any of the complexes which are said to be so common now. She 
never entirely lost that girlish look, but as she grew into a woman 
her eyes acquired a depth and a fire, giving the impression of still 
pools behind which storms raged. She was not the type of modern 
girl, with the modern girl's habits and lack of poise; yet she took 
easily enough to modern ways. But essentially she was an Indian 
girl and, more particularly, a Kashmiri girl, sensitive and proud, 
childlike and grown-up, foolish and wise. She was reserved to those 
she did not know or did not like, but bubbling over with gaiety 
and frankness before those she knew and liked. She was quick in 
her judgment and not always fair or right, but she stuck to her 
instinctive likes and dislikes. There was no guile in her. If she 
disliked a person, it was obvious, and she made no attempt to hide 
the fact. Even if she had tried to do so, she would probably not 
have succeeded. I have come across few persons who have pro- 
duced such an impression of sincerity upon me as she did. 

Our Marriage and After 

I thought of the early years of our marriage when, with all my 
tremendous liking for Kamala, I almost forgot her and denied 
her, in so many ways, that comradeship which was her due. 
For I was then like a person possessed, giving myself utterly to 
the cause I had espoused, living in a dream-world of my own, 
and looking at the real people who surrounded me as unsub- 
stantial shadows. I worked to the utmost of my capacity and my 
mind was filled to the brim with the subject that engrossed me. 
I gave all my energy to that cause and had little left to spare. 

40 



And yet I was very far from forgetting her, and I came back 
to her again and again as to a sure haven. If I was away for a 
number of days the thought of her cooled my mind, and I looked 
forward eagerly to my return home. What indeed could I hav£ 
done if she had not been there to comfort me and give me 
strength, and thus enable me to re-charge the exhausted battery 
of my mind and body? 

I had taken from her what she gave me. What had I given to 
her in exchange during these early years ? I had failed evidently 
and, possibly, she carried the deep impress of those days upon 
her. With her inordinate pride and sensitiveness she did not want 
to come to me to ask for help, although I could have given her 
that help more than anyone else. She wanted to play her own 
part in the national struggle and not be merely a hanger-on and 
a shadow of her husband. She wanted to justify herself to her own 
self as well as to the world. Nothing in the world could have pleased 
me more than this, but I was far too busy to sec beneath the 
surface, and I was blind to what she looked for and so ardently 
desired. And then prison claimed me so often and I was away 
from her, or else she was ill. Like Chitra in Tagore's play, she 
seemed to say to me: 'I am Chitra. No goddess to be worshipped, 
nor yet the object of common pity to be brushed aside like a moth 
with indifference. Ifyou deign to keep me by your side in the path 
of danger and daring, ifyou allow me to share the great duties of 
your life, then you will know my true self 

But she did not say this to me in words and it was only gradu- 
ally that I read the message of her eyes. 

In the early months of 1930 I sensed her desire and we worked 
together, and I found in this experience a new delight. We lived 
for a while on the edge of life, as it were, for the clouds were 
gathering and a national upheaval was coming. Those were 
pleasant months for us, but they ended too soon, and, early in 
April, the country was in the grip of civil disobedience and govern- 
mental repression, and I was in prison again. 

Most of us menfolk were in prison. And then a remarkable 
thing happened. Our women came to the front and took charge 
of the struggle. Women had always been there of course, but 
now there was an avalanche of them, which took not only the 
British Government but their own menfolk by surprise. Here 
were these women, women of the upper or middle classes, lead- 
ing sheltered lives in their homes — peasant women, working- 
class women, rich women — pouring out in their tens of thou- 
sands in defiance of government order and police lathi. It was 
not only that display of courage and daring, but what was even 
more surprising was the organizational power they showed. 

Never can I forget the thrill that came to us in Naini Prison 

41 



when news of this reached us, the enormous pride in the women 
of India that filled us. We could hardly talk about all this among 
ourselves, for our hearts were full and our eyes were dim with 
tears. 

My father had joined us later in Naini Prison, and he told us 
much that we did not know. He had been functioning outside as 
the leader of the civil disobedience movement, and he had en- 
couraged in no way these aggressive activities of the women all 
over the country. He disliked, in his paternal and somewhat old- 
fashioned way, young women and old messing about in the streets 
under the hot sun of summer and coming into conflict with the 
police. But he realised the temper of the people and did not dis- 
courage any one, not even his wife and daughters and daughter- 
in-law. He told us how he had been agreeably surprised to see 
the energy, courage, and ability displayed by women all over the 
country; of the girls of his own household he spoke with affec- 
tionate pride. 

At father's instance, a 'Resolution of Remembrance' was passed 
at thousands of public meetings all over India on January 26th, 
1931, the anniversary of India's Independence Day. These meet- 
ings were banned by the police and many of them were forcibly 
broken up. Father had organized this from his sickbed and it 
was a triumph of organization, for we could not use the news- 
papers, or the mails, or the telegraph, or the telephone, or any 
of the established printing presses. And yet at a fixed time on an 
identical day all over this vast country, even in remote villages, 
the resolution was read out in the language of the province and 
adopted. Ten days after the resolution was so adopted, father died. 

The resolution was a long one. But a part of it related to the 
women of India: 'We record our homage and deep admiration 
for the womanhood of India, who, in the hour of peril for the 
motherland, forsook the shelter of their homes and, with unfailing 
courage and endurance, stood shoulder to shoulder with their 
menfolk in the front line of India's national army to share with 
them the sacrifices and triumphs of the struggle....' 

In this upheaval Kamala had played a brave and notable part 
and on her inexperienced shoulders fell the task of organizing 
our work in the city of Allahabad when every known worker 
was in prison. She made up for that inexperience by her fire 
and energy and, within a few months, she became the pride of 
Allahabad. 

We met again under the shadow of my father's last illness and 
his death. We met on a new footing of comradeship and under- 
standing. A few months later when we went with our daughter to 
Ceylon for our first brief holiday, and our last, we seemed to have 
discovered each other anew. All the past years that we had passed 

42 



together had been but a preparation for this new and more inti- 
mate relationship. 

We came back all too soon and work claimed me and, later, 
prison. There was to be no more holidaying, no working toge- 
ther, not even being together, except for a brief while between 
two long prison terms of two years each which followed each 
other. Before the second of these was over, Kamala lay dying. 

When I was arrested in February, 1934, on a Calcutta warrant, 
Kamala went up to our rooms to collect some clothes for me. I 
followed her to say good-bye to her. Suddenly she clung to me 
and, fainting, collapsed. This was unusual for her as we had 
trained ourselves to take this jail-going lightly and cheerfully 
and to make as little fuss about it as possible. Was it some pre- 
monition she had that this was our last more or less normal meeting? 

Two long prison terms of two years each had come between 
me and her just when our need for each other was greatest, just 
when we had come so near to each other. I thought of this during 
the long days in jail, and yet I hoped that the time would surely 
come when we would be together again. How did she fare during 
these years? I can guess but even I do not know, for during jail 
interviews, or during a brief interval outside there was little 
normality. We had to be always on our best behaviour lest we 
might cause pain to the other by showing our own distress. But 
it was obvious that she was greatly troubled and distressed over 
many things and there was no peace in her mind. I might have 
been of some help, but not from jail. 

The Problem of Human Relationships 

All these and many other thoughts, came to my mind during my 
long solitary hours in Badenweiler. I did not shed the atmos- 
phere ofjail easily; I had long got used to it and the new envi- 
ronment did not make any great change. I was living in the nazi 
domain with all its strange happenings which I disliked so much, 
but nazism did not interfere with me. There were few evidences 
of it in that quiet village in a corner of the Black Forest. 

Or perhaps my mind was full of other matters. My past life 
unrolled itself before me and there was always Kamala standing 
by. She became a symbol of Indian women, or of woman herself. 
Sometimes she grew curiously mixed up with my ideas of India, 
that land of ours so dear to us, with all her faults and weak- 
nesses, so elusive and so full of mystery. What was Kamala? 
Did I know her? understand her real self? Did she know or under- 
stand me? For I too was an abnormal person with mystery and 
unplumbed depths within me, which I could not myself fathom. 

43 



Sometimes I had thought thai she was a little frightened of me 
because of this. I had been, and was, a most unsatisfactory person 
to marry. Kamala and I were unlike each other in some ways, 
and yet in some other ways very alike; we did not complement 
each other. Our very strength became a weakness in our relations 
to each other. There could either be complete understanding, 
a perfect union of minds, or difficulties. Neither of us could live 
a humdrum domestic life, accepting things as they were. 

Among the many pictures that were displayed in the bazaars 
in India, there was one containing two separate pictures of Kamala 
and me, side by side, with the inscription at the top, adarsha jori, 
the model or ideal couple, as so many people imagined us to be. 
But the ideal is terribly difficult to grasp or to hold. Yet I remem- 
ber telling Kamala, during our holiday in Ceylon, how fortunate 
we had been in spite of difficulties and differences, in spite of all 
the tricks life had played upon us, that marriage was an odd affair, 
and it had not ceased to be so even after thousands of years of 
experience. We saw around us the wrecks of many a marriage or, 
what was no better, the conversion ofwhat was bright and golden 
into dross. How fortunate we were, I told her, and she agreed, for 
though we had sometimes quarrelled and grown angry with each 
other we kept that vital spark alight, and for each one of us life was 
always unfolding new adventure and giving fresh insight into 
each other. 

The problem of human relationships, how fundamental it is, 
and how often ignored in our fierce arguments about politics 
and economics. It was not so ignored in the old and wise civi- 
lizations of India and China, where they developed patterns of 
social behaviour which, with all their faults, certainly gave poise 
to the individual. That poise is not in evidence in India to-day. 
But where is it in the countries of the West which have progressed 
so much in other directions ? Or is poise essentially static and 
opposed to progressive change ? Must we sacrifice one for the other ? 
Surely it should be possible to have a union of poise and inner 
and outer progress, of the wisdom of the old with the science and 
the vigour of the new. Indeed we appear to have arrived at a stage 
in the world's history when the only alternative to such a union is 
likely to be the destruction and undoing of both. 

Christmas 1935 

Kamala's condition took a turn for the better. It was not very 
marked, but after the strain of the past weeks we experienced 
great relief. She had got over that crisis and stabilized her con- 
dition, and that in itself was a gain. This continued for another 
month and I took advantage of it to pay a brief visit to England 

44 



with our daughter, Indira. I had not been there for eight years 
and many friends pressed me to visit them. 

I came back to Badenweiler and resumed the old routine. 
Winter had come and the landscape was white with snow. As 
Christmas approached there was a marked deterioration in 
Kamala's condition. Another crisis had come, and it seemed 
that her life hung by a mere thread. During those last days of 
1935 I ploughed my way through snow and slush not knowing 
how many days or hours she would live. The calm winter scene 
with its mantle of white snow seemed so like the peace of cold 
death to me, and I lost all my past hopeful optimism. 

But Kamala fought this crisis also and with amazing vitality 
survived it. She grew better and more cheerful and wanted us to 
take her away from Badenweiler. She was weary of the place, and 
another factor which made a difference was the death of another 
patient in the sanatorium, who had sometimes sent flowers to 
her, and once or twice visited her. That patient — he was an Irish 
boy — had been much better than Kamala and was even allowed 
to go out for walks. We tried to keep the news of his sudden death 
from her, but we did not succeed. Those who are ill, and especially 
those who have the misfortune to stay in a sanatorium, seem to 
develop a sixth sense which tells them much that is sought to be 
hid from them. 

In January I went to Paris for a few days and paid another 
brief visit to London. Life was pulling at me again and news 
reached me, in London, that I had been elected for a second time 
president of the Indian National Congress, which was to meet 
in April. I had been expecting this as friends had forewarned 
me, and I had even discussed it with Kamala. It was a dilemma 
for me: to leave her as she was or to resign from the presidentship. 
She would not have me resign. She was just a little better and 
we thought that I could come back to her later. 

At the end of January, 1936, Kamala left Badenweiler and 
was taken to a sanatorium near Lausanne in Switzerland. 

Death 

Both Kamala and I liked the change to Switzerland. She was 
more cheerful and I felt a little more at home in that part of 
Switzerland which I knew fairly well. There was no marked 
change in her condition and it seemed that there was no crisis 
ahead. She was likely to continue as she was for a considerable 
period, making perhaps slow progress. 

Meanwhile the call of India was insistent and friends there 
were pressing me to return. My mind grew restless and ever more 
occupied with the problems of my country. For some years I had 

45 



been cut off by prison or otherwise from active participation in 
public affairs, and I was straining at the leash. My visits to Lon- 
don and Paris and news from India had drawn me out of my shell 
and I could not go back into it. 

I discussed the matter with Kamala and consulted the doctor. 
They agreed that I should return to India and I booked my 
passage by the Dutch K.L.M. air line. I was to leave Lausanne 
on February 28th. After all this had been fixed up, I found that 
Kamala did not at all like the idea of my leaving her. And yet 
she would not ask me to change my plans. I told her that I would 
not make a long stay in India and hoped to return after two or 
three months. I could return even earlier if she wanted me to. 
A cable would bring me by air to her within a week. 

Four or five days remained before the date fixed for my depar- 
ture. Indira, who was at school at Bex nearby, was coming over 
to spend those last days with us. The doctor came to me and 
suggested that I should postpone my return by a week or ten days. 
More he would not say. I agreed immediately and made another 
reservation in a subsequent K.L.M. plane. 

As these last days went by a subtle change seemed to come 
over Kamala. The physical condition was much the same, so far 
as we could see, but her mind appeared to pay less attention to 
her physical environment. She would tell me that someone was 
calling her, or that she saw some figure or shape enter the room 
when I saw none. 

Early on the morning of February 28th, she breathed her last. 
Indira was there, and so was our faithful friend and constant 
companion during these months, Dr. M. Atal. 

A few other friends came from neighbouring towns in Swit- 
zerland, and we took her to the crematorium in Lausanne. 
Within a few minutes that fair body and that lovely face, which 
used to smile so often and so well, were reduced to ashes. A small 
-urn contained the mortal remains of one who had been vital, so 
bright and so full of life. 

Mussolini Return 

The bond that kept me in Lausanne and Europe was broken and 
there was no need for me to remain there any longer. Indeed, 
something else within me was also broken, the realization ofwhich 
only came gradually to me, for those days were black days for me 
and my mind did not function properly. Indira and I went to 
Montreux to spend a few quiet days together. 

During our stay at Montreux I had a visit from the Italian 
Consul at Lausanne, who came over especially to convey to me 
Signor Mussolini's deep sympathy at my loss. I was a little sur- 

46 



prised, for I had not met Signor Mussolini or had any other con- 
tacts with him. I asked the Consul to convey my gratitude to him. 
Some weeks earlier a friend in Rome had written to me to say 
that Signor Mussolini would like to meet me. There was no 
question of my going to Rome then, and I said so. Later, when 
I was thinking of returning to India by air, that message was 
repeated and there was a touch of eagerness and insistence about 
it. I wanted to avoid this interview and yet I had no desire to 
be discourteous. Normally I might have got over my distaste for 
meeting him, for I was curious also to know what kind of man 
the Duce was. But the Abyssinian campaign was being carried 
on then and my meeting him would inevitably have led to all 
manner of inferences, and would be used for fascist propaganda. 
No denial from me would go far. I knew of several recent in- 
stances when Indian students and others visiting Italy had been 
utilized, against their wishes and sometimes even without their 
knowledge, for fascist propaganda. And then there had been 
the bogus interview with Mr. Gandhi which the Giornale d'ltalia 
had published in 1931. 

I conveyed my regrets, therefore, to my friend, and later wrote 
again and telephoned to him to avoid any possibility of mis- 
understanding. All this was before Kamala's death. After her 
death I sent another message pointing out that, even apart from 
other reasons, I was in no mood then for an interview with 
anyone. 

All this insistence on my part became necessary, as I was 
passing through Rome by the K.L.M. and would have to spend 
an evening and night there. I could not avoid this passing visit 
and brief stay. 

After a few days at Montreux I proceeded to Geneva and 
Marseilles, where I boarded the K.L.M. air liner for the East. 
On arrival in Rome in the late afternoon, I was met by a high 
official who handed me a letter from the Chef de Cabinet of Signor 
Mussolini. The Duce, it stated, would be glad to meet me and 
he had fixed six o'clock that evening for the interview. I was 
surprised and reminded him of my previous messages. But he 
insisted that it had now all been fixed up and the arrangement 
could not be upset. Indeed if the interview did not take place 
there was every likelihood of his being dismissed from his office. 
I was assured that nothing would appear in the press, and that 
I need only see the Duce, for a few minutes. All that he wanted 
to do was to shake hands with me and to convey personally his 
condolences at my wife's death. So we argued for a full hour with 
all courtesy on both sides but with increasing strain; it was a most 
exhausting hour for me and probably more so for the other party. 
The time fixed for the interview was at last upon us and I had my 

47 



way. A telephone message was sent to the Duce's palace that 
I could not come. 

That evening I sent a letter to Signor Mussolini expressing 
my regret that I could not take advantage of his kind invitation 
to me to see him and thanking him for his message of sympathy. 

I continued my journey. At Cairo there were some old friends 
to meet me, and then further east, over the deserts of Western 
Asia. Various incidents, and the arrangements necessary for my 
journey, had so far kept my mind occupied. But after leaving 
Cairo and flying, hour after hour, over this desolate desert area, 
a terrible loneliness gripped me and I felt empty and purpose- 
less. I was going back alone to my home, which was no longer' 
home for me, and there by my side was a basket and that basket 
contained an urn. That was all that remained of Kamala, and all 
our bright dreams were also dead and turned to ashes. She is no 
more, Kamala is no more, my mind kept on repeating. 

I thought of my autobiography, that record of my life, which 
I had discussed with her as she lay in Bhowali Sanatorium. And, 
as I was writing it, sometimes I would take a chapter or two and 
read it out to her. She had only seen or heard a part of it: she 
would never see the rest; nor would we write any more chap- 
ters together in the book of life. 

When I reached Baghdad I sent a cable to my publishers in 
London, who were bringing out my autobiography, giving them 
the dedication for the book: 'To Kamala, who is no more.' 

Karachi came, and crowds and many familiar faces. And then 
Allahabad, where we carried the precious urn to the swift- 
flowing Ganges and poured the ashes into the bosom of that 
noble river. How many of our forebears she had carried thus 
to the sea, how many of those who follow us will take that last 
journey in the embrace of her water. 



48 



CHAPTER THREE 

THE QUEST 
The Panorama of India's Past 



DURING THESE YEARS OF THOUGHT AND ACTIVITY MY MIND HAS BEEN 

full of India, trying to understand her and to analyse my own 
reactions towards her. I went back to my childhood days and 
tried to remember what I felt like then, what vague shape this 
conception took in my growing mind, and how it was moulded 
by fresh experience. Sometimes it receded into the background, 
but it was always there, slowly changing, a queer mixture deriv- 
ed from old story and legend and modern fact. It produced a 
sensation of pride in me as well as that of shame, for I was 
ashamed of much that I saw around me, of superstitious prac- 
tices, of outworn ideas, and, above all, our subject and poverty- 
stricken state. 

As I grew up and became engaged in activities which pro- 
mised to lead to India's freedom, I became obsessed with the 
thought of India. What was this India that possessed me and 
beckoned to me continually, urging me to action so that we 
might realize some vague but deeply-felt desire of our hearts? 
The initial urge came to me, I suppose, through pride, both 
individual and national, and the desire, common to all men, 
to resist another's domination and have freedom to live the life 
of our choice. It seemed monstrous to me that a great country 
like India, with a rich and immemorial past, should be bound 
hand and foot to a far-away island which imposed its will upon 
her. It was still more monstrous that this forcible union had 
resulted in poverty and degradation beyond measure. That was 
reason enough for me and for others to act. 

But it was not enough to satisfy the questioning that arose 
within me. What is this India, apart from her physical and 
geographical aspects? What did she represent in the past? What 
gave strength to her then? How did she lose that old strength? 
And has she lost it completely? Does she represent anything 
vital now, apart from being the home of a vast number of human 
beings? How does she fit into the modern world? 

This wider international aspect of the problem grew upon 

49 



me as I realized more and more how isolation was both undesir- 
able and impossible. The future that took shape in my mind 
was one of intimate co-operation, politically, economically, and 
culturally, between India and the other countries of the world. 
But before the future came there was the present, and behind 
the present lay the long and tangled past, out of which the pre- 
sent had grown. So to the past I looked for understanding. 

India was in my blood and there was much in her that instinc- 
tively thrilled me. And yet I approached her almost as an alien 
critic, full of dislike for the present as well as for many of the 
relics of the past that I saw. To some extent I came to her via 
the West, and looked at her as a friendly westerner might have 
done. I was eager and anxious to change her outlook and appear- 
ance and give her the garb of modernity. And yet doubts arose 
within me. Did I know India? — I who presumed to scrap much 
of her past heritage? There was a great deal that had to be 
scrapped, that must be scrapped; but surely India could not 
have been what she undoubtedly was, and could not have con- 
tinued a cultured existence for thousands of years, if she had not 
possessed something very vital and enduring, something that 
was worthwhile. What was this something? 

I stood on a mound of Mohenjo-daro in the Indus Valley in 
the north-west of India, and all around me lay the houses and 
streets of this ancient city that is said to have existed over five 
thousand years ago; and even then it was an old and well- 
developed civilization. 'The Indus civilization,' writes Professor 
Childe, 'represents a very prefect adjustment of human life to a 
specific environment that can only have resulted from years of 
patient effort. And it has endured; it is already specifically 
Indian and forms the basis of modern Indian culture.' Aston- 
ishing thought: that any culture or civilization should have this 
continuity for five or six thousand years or more; and not in a 
static, unchanging sense, for India was changing and progressing 
all the time. She was coming into intimate contact with the 
Persians, the Egyptians, the Greeks, the Chinese, the Arabs, the 
Central Asians, and the peoples of the Mediterranean. But though 
she influenced them and was influenced by them, her cultural 
basis was strong enough to endure. What was the secret of this 
strength? Where did it come from? 

I read her history and read also a part of her abundant ancient 
literature, and was powerfully impressed by the vigour of the 
thought, the clarity of the language, and the richness of the 
mind that lay behind it. I journeyed through India in the company 
of mighty travellers from China and Western and Central Asia 
who came here in the remote past and left records of their travels. 
I thought of what India had accomplished in Eastern Asia, in 

50 



Angkor, Borobudur, and many other places. I wandered over 
the Himalayas, which are closely connected with old myth and 
legend, and which have influenced so much our thought and 
literature. My love of the mountains and my kinship with Kash- 
mir especially drew me to them, and I saw there not only the life 
and vigour and beauty of the present, but also the memoried 
loveliness of ages past. The mighty rivers of India that flow from 
this great mountain barrier into the plains of India attracted me 
and reminded me of innumerable phases of our history. The Indus 
or Sifidhu, from which our country came to be called India and 
Hindustan, and across which races and tribes and caravans and 
armies have come for thousands of years; the Brahmaputra, 
rather cut off from the main current of history, but living in old 
story, forcing its way into India through deep chasms cut in the 
heart of the northeastern mountains, and then flowing calmly 
in a gracious sweep between mountain and wooded plain; the 
Jumna, round which cluster so many legends ofdance and fun and 
play; and the Ganges, above all the river of India, which has held 
India's heart captive and drawn uncounted millions to her banks 
since the dawn ofhistory. The story ofthe Ganges, from her source 
to the sea, from old times to new, is the story of India's civiliza- 
tion and culture, of the rise and fall of empires, of great and 
proud cities, of the adventure of man and the quest of the mind 
which has so occupied India's thinkers, of the richness and fulfil- 
ment of life as well as its denial and renunciation, of ups and 
downs, of growth and decay, of life and death. 

I visited old monuments and ruins and ancient sculptures and 
frescoes — Ajanta, Ellora, the Elephanta Caves, and other places 
— and I also saw the lovely buildings of a later age in Agra and 
Delhi, where every stone told its story of India's past. 

In my own city of Allahabad or in Hardwar I would go to 
the great bathing festivals, the Kumbh Mela, and see hundreds 
of thousands of people come, as their forebears had come for 
thousands of years from all over India, to bathe in the Ganges. 
I would remember descriptions of these festivals written thirteen 
hundred years ago by Chinese pilgrims and others, and even 
then these melas were ancient and lost in an unknown antiquity. 
What was the tremendous faith, I wondered, that had drawn our 
people for untold generations to this famous river of India? 

These journeys and visits of mine, with the background of 
my reading, gave me an insight into the past. To a somewhat 
bare intellectual understanding was added an emotional appre- 
ciation, and gradually a sense of reality began to creep into my 
mental picture of India, and the land of my forefathers became 
peopled with living beings, who laughed and wept, loved and 
suffered; and among them were men who seemed to know life 

51 



and understand it, and out of their wisdom they had built a 
structure which gave India a cultural stability which lasted for 
thousands of years. Hundreds of vivid pictures of this past filled 
my mind, and they would stand out as soon as I visited a parti- 
cular place associated with them. At Sarnath, near Benares, I 
would almost see the Buddha preaching his first sermon, and 
some of his recorded words would come like a distant echo to 
me through two thousand five hundred years. Ashoka's pillars of 
stone with their inscriptions would speak to me in their magni- 
ficent language and tell me of a man who, though an emperor, 
was greater than any king or emperor. At Fatehpur-Sikri, Akbar, 
forgetful of his empire, was seated holding converse and debate 
with the learned of all faiths, curious to learn something new 
and seeking an answer to the eternal problem of man. 

Thus slowly the long panorama of India's history unfolded 
itself before me, with its ups and downs, its triumphs and defeats. 
There seemed to me something unique about the continuity of 
a cultural tradition through five thousand years of history, of 
invasion and upheaval, a tradition which was widespread among 
the masses and powerfully influenced them. Only China has had 
such a continuity of tradition and cultural life. And this panorama 
of the past gradually merged into the unhappy present, when India, 
for all her past greatness and stability, was a slave country, an 
appendage of Britain, and all over the world terrible and devastat- 
ing war was raging and brutalizing humanity. But that vision of 
five thousand years gave me a new perspective, and the burden 
of the present seemed to grow lighter. 

The hundred and eighty years of British rule in India were 
just one of the unhappy interludes in her long story; she would 
find herself again; already the last page of this chapter was being 
written. The world also will survive the horror of to-day and build 
itself anew on fresh foundations. 

Nationalism and Internationalism 

My reaction to India thus was often an emotional one, condi- 
tioned and limited in many ways. It took the form of nation- 
alism. In the case of many people the conditioning and limiting 
factors are absent. But nationalism was and is inevitable in the 
India of my day; it is a natural and healthy growth. For any sub- 
ject country national freedom must be the first and dominant 
urge; for India, with her intense sense of individuality and a past 
heritage, it was doubly so. 

Recent events all over the world have demonstrated that the 
notion that nationalism is fading away before the impact of 
internationalism and proletarian movements has little truth. It is 

52 



still one of the most powerful urges that move a people, and 
round it cluster sentiments and traditions and a sense of common 
living and common purpose. While the intellectual strata of the 
middle classes were gradually moving away from nationalism, 
or so they thought, labour and proletarian movements, deliberately 
based on internationalism, were drifting towards nationalism. 
The coming of war swept everybody everywhere into the net of 
nationalism. This remarkable resurgence of nationalism, or rather 
a re-discovery of it and a new realization of its vital significance, 
has raised new problems and altered the form and shape of old 
problems. Old established traditions cannot be easily scrapped 
or dispensed with; in moments of crisis they rise and dominate the 
minds of men, and often, as we have seen, a deliberate attempt 
is made to use those traditions to rouse a people to a high pitch of 
effort and sacrifice. Traditions have to be accepted to a large 
extent and adapted and transformed to meet new conditions and 
ways of thought, and at the same time new traditions have to be 
built up. The nationalist ideal is deep and strong; it is not a thing 
of the past with no future significance. But other ideals, more 
based on the ineluctable facts of to-day, have arisen, the inter- 
national ideal and the proletarian ideal, and there must be some 
kind of fusion between these various ideals ifwe are to have a world 
equilibrium and a lessening of conflict. The abiding appeal of 
nationalism to the spirit of man has to be recognized and pro- 
vided for, but its sway limited to a narrower sphere. 

If nationalism is still so universal in its influence, even in coun- 
tries powerfully affected by new ideas and international forces, 
how much more must it dominate the mind of India. Sometimes 
we are told that our nationalism is a sign of our backwardness 
and even our demand for independence indicates our narrow- 
mindedness. Those who tell us so seem to imagine that true inter- 
nationalism would triumph ifwe agreed to remain as junior part- 
ners in the British Empire or Commonwealth of Nations. They 
do not appear to realize that this particular type of so-called 
internationalism is only an extension of a narrow British natio- 
nalism, which could not have appealed to us even if the logical 
consequences of Anglo-Indian history had not utterly rooted out 
its possibility from our minds. Nevertheless, India, for all her 
intense nationalistic fervour, has gone further than many nations 
in her acceptance of real internationalism and the co-ordination, 
and even to some extent the subordination, of the independent 
nation state to a world organization. 

India's Strength and Weakness 

The search for the sources of India's strength and for her deter- 

53 



ioration and decay is long and intricate. Yet the recent causes 
of that decay are obvious enough. She fell behind in the march 
of technique, and Europe, which had long been backward in 
many matters, took the lead in technical progress. Behind this 
technical progress was the spirit of science and a bubling life 
and spirit which displayed itself in many activities and in ad- 
venturous voyages of discovery. New techniques gave military 
strength to the countries of western Europe, and it was easy for 
them to spread out and dominate the East. That is the story not 
only of India, but of almost the whole of Asia. 

Why this should have happened so is more difficult to unravel, 
for India was not lacking in mental alertness and technical skill 
in earlier times. One senses a progressive deterioration during 
centuries. The urge to life and endeavour becomes less, the crea- 
tive spirit fades away and gives place to the imitative. Where 
triumphant and rebellious thought had tried to pierce the my- 
steries of nature and the universe, the wordy commentator comes 
with his glosses and long explanations. Magnificent art and 
sculpture give way to meticulous carving of intricate detail 
without nobility of conception or design. The vigour and rich- 
ness of language, powerful yet simple, are followed by highly 
ornate and complex literary forms. The urge to adventure and 
the overflowing life which led to vast schemes of distant coloni- 
zation and the transplantation of Indian culture in far lands: 
all these fade away and a narrow orthodoxy taboos even the 
crossing of the high seas. A rational spirit of inquiry, so evident 
in earlier times, which might well have led to the further growth 
of science, is replaced by irrationalism and a blind idolatory of 
the past. Indian life becomes a sluggish stream, living in the past, 
moving slowly through the accumulations of dead centuries. 
The heavy burden of the past crushes it and a kind of coma seizes 
it. It is not surprising that in this condition of mental stupor and 
physical weariness India should have deteriorated and remained 
rigid and immobile, while other parts of the world marched ahead. 

Yet this is not a complete or wholly correct survey. If there 
had only been a long and unrelieved period of rigidity and 
stagnation, this might well have resulted in a complete break 
with the past, the death of an era, and the erection of some- 
thing new on its ruins. There has not been such a break and there 
is a definite continuity. Also, from time to time, vivid periods of 
renascence have occurred, and some of them have been long and 
brilliant. Always there is visible an attempt to understand and 
adapt the new and harmonize it with the old, or at any rate with 
parts of the old which were considered worth preserving. Often 
that old retains an external form only, as a kind of symbol, and 
changes its inner content. But something vital and living continues, 

54 



some urge driving the people in a direction not wholly realized, 
and always a desire for synthesis between the old and the new. 
It was this urge and desire that kept them going and enabled them 
to absorb new ideas while retaining much of the old. Whether 
there was such a thing as an Indian dream through the ages, 
vivid and full of life or sometimes reduced to the murmurings 
of troubled sleep, I do not know. Every people and every nation 
has some such belief or myth of national destiny and perhaps it 
is partly true in each case. Being an Indian I am myself influenced 
by this reality or myth about India, and I feel that anything that 
had the power to mould hundreds of generations, without a break, 
must have drawn its enduring vitality from some deep well of 
strength, and have had the capacity to renew that vitality from 
age to age. 

Was there some such well of strength? And if so, did it dry 
up, or did it have hidden springs to replenish it? What of today ? 
Are there any springs still functioning from which we can refresh 
and strengthen ourselves? We are an old race, or rather an odd 
mixture of many races, and our racial memories go back to the 
dawn of history. Have we had our day and arc we now living in 
the late afternoon or evening of our existence, just carrying on 
after the manner of the aged, quiescent, devitalized, uncreative, 
desiring peace and sleep above all else? 

No people, no races remain unchanged. Continually they are 
mixing with others and slowly changing; they may appear to die 
almost and then rise again as a new people or just a variation of 
the old. There may be a definite break between the old people and 
the new, or vital links of thought and ideals may join them. 

History has numerous instances of old and well-established 
civilizations fading away or being ended suddenly, and vigor- 
ous new cultures taking their place. Is it some vital energy, sonic 
inner source of strength that gives life to a civilization or a people, 
without which all effort is ineffective, like the vain attempt of an 
aged person to plav the part of a youth? 

Among the peoples of the world to-day I have sensed this vital 
energy chiefly in three — Americans, Russians, and the Chinese; 
a queer combination! Americans, in spite of having their roots 
in the old world, are a new people, uninhibited and without the 
burdens and complexes of old races, and it is easy to understand 
their abounding vitality. So also are the Canadians, Australians, 
and New Zealanders, all of them largely cut off from the old 
world and facing life in all its newness. 

Russians are not a new people, and yet there has been a comp- 
lete break from the old, like that of death, and they have been 
reincarnated anew, in a manner for which there is no example 
in history. They have become youthful again with an energy and 

55 



vitality lhat are amazing. They are searching for some of their 
old roots again, but for all practical purposes they are a new people, 
a new race and a new civilization. 

The Russian example shows how a people can revitalize itself, 
become youthful again, if it is prepared to pay the price for it, 
and tap the springs of suppressed strength and energy among 
the masses. Perhaps this war, with all its horror and frightfulness, 
might result in the rejuvenation of other peoples also, such as 
survive from the holocaust. 

The Chinese stand apart from all these. They are not a new 
race, nor have they gone through that shock of change, from top 
to bottom, which came to Russia. Undoubtedly, seven years of 
cruel war has changed them, as it must. How far this change is 
due to the war or to more abiding causes, or whether it is a mixture 
of the two, I do not know, but the vitality of the Chinese people 
astonishes me. I cannot imagine a people endowed with such 
bed-rock strength going under. 

Something of that vitality which I saw in China I have sensed 
at times in the Indian people also. Not always, and anyway it is 
difficult for me to take an objective view. Perhaps my wishes distort 
my thinking. But always I was in search for this in my wanderings 
among the Indian people. If they had this vitality, then it was 
well with them and they would make good. If they lacked it 
completely, then our political efforts and shouting were all make- 
believe and would not carry us far. I was not interested in making 
some political arrangement which would enable our people to 
carry on more or less as before, only a little better. I felt they had 
vast stores of suppressed energy and ability, and I wanted to release 
these and make them feel young and vital again. India, constituted 
as she is, cannot play a secondary part in the world. She will either 
count for a great deal or not count at all. No middle position 
attracted me. Nor did I think any intermediate position feasible. 

Behind the past quarter of a century's struggle for India's 
independence and all our conflicts with British authority, lay in 
my mind, and that of many others, the desire to revitalize India. 
We felt that through action and self-imposed suffering and sacri- 
fice, through voluntarily facing risk and danger, through refusal 
to submit to what we considered evil and wrong, would we re- 
charge the battery of India's spirit and waken her from her long 
slumber. Though we came into conflict continually with the 
British Government in India, our eyes were always turned towards 
our own people. Political advantage had value only in so far as it 
helped in that fundamental purpose of ours. Because ofthis govern- 
ing motive, frequently we acted as no politician, moving in the 
narrow sphere of politics only, would have done, and foreign and 
Indian critics expressed surprise at the folly and intransigence of 

56 



our ways. Whether we were foolish or not, the historians of the 
future will judge. We aimed high and looked far. Probably we were 
often foolish, from the point of view of opportunist politics, but at 
no time did we forget that our main purpose was to raise the whole 
level of the Indian people, psychologically and spiritually and also, 
of course, politically and economically. It was the building up of 
that real inner strength of the people that we were after, knowing 
that the rest would inevitably follow. We had to wipe out some 
generations of shameful subservience and timid submission to an 
arrogant alien authority. 

The Search for India 

Though books and old monuments and past cultural achievements 
helped to produce some understanding of India, they did not 
satisfy me or give me the answer I was looking for. Nor could they, 
for they dealt with a past age, and I wanted to know if there was 
any real connection between that past and the present. The present 
for me, and for many others like me, was an odd mixture of medi- 
aevalism, appalling poverty and misery and a somewhat super- 
ficial modernism of the middle classes. I was not an admirer of 
my own class or kind, and yet inevitably I looked to it for leader- 
ship in the struggle for India's salvation; that middle class felt 
caged and circumscribed and wanted to grow and develop itself. 
Unable to do so within the framework of British rule, a spirit of 
revolt grew against this rule, and yet this spirit was not directed 
against the structure that crushed us. It sought to retain it and 
control it by displacing the British. These middle classes were too 
much the product of that structure to challenge it and seek to 
uproot it. 

New forces arose that drove us to the masses in the villages, 
and for the first time, a new and different India rose up before 
the young intellectuals who had almost forgotten its existence 
or attached little importance to it. It was a disturbing sight, not 
only because of its stark misery and the magnitude of its problems, 
but because it began to upset some of our values and conclusions. 
So began for us the discovery of India as it was, and it produced 
both understanding and conflict within us. Our reactions varied 
and depended on our previous environment and experience. 
Some were already sufficiently acquainted with these village masses 
not to experience any new sensation; they took them for granted. 
But for me it was a real voyage of discovery, and, while I was 
always painfully conscious of the failings and weaknesses of my 
people, I found in India's countryfolk something, difficult to define, 
which attracted me. That something I had missed in our middle 
classes. 

57 



I do not idealise the conception of the masses and, as far as 
possible, I try to avoid thinking of them as a theoretical abstrac- 
tion. The people of India are very real to me in their great variety 
and, in spite of their vast numbers, I try to think of them as 
individuals rather than as vague groups. Perhaps it was because 
I did not expect much from them that I was not disappointed; 
I found more than I had expected. It struck me that perhaps the 
reason for this, and for a certain stability and potential strength 
that they possessed, was the old Indian cultural tradition which 
was still retained by them in a small measure. Much had gone in 
the battering they had received during the past 200 years. Yet 
something remained that was worth while, and with it so much 
that was worthless and evil. 

During the 'twenties my work was largely confined to my own 
province and I travelled extensively and intensively through the 
towns and villages of the forty-eight districts of the United Pro- 
vinces of Agra and Oudh, that heart of Hindustan as it has so long 
been considered, the seat and centre of both ancient and mediaeval 
civilization, the melting pot of so many races and cultures, the area 
where the great revolt of 1857 blazed up and was later ruthlessly 
crushed. I grew to know the sturdy Jat of the northern and western 
districts, that typical son of the soil, brave and independent 
looking, relatively more prosperous; the Rajput peasant and petty 
landholder, still proud of his race and ancestry, even though he 
might have changed his faith and adopted Islam; the deft and 
skilful artisans and cottage workers, both Hindu and Moslem; 
the poorer peasantry and tenants in their vast numbers, especially 
in Oudh and the eastern districts, crushed and ground down by 
generations of oppression and poverty, hardly daring to hope that 
a change would come to better their lot, and yet hoping and full 
of faith. 

During the 'thirties, in the intervals of my life out of prison, 
and especially during the election campaign of 1936-37, 1 travelled 
more extensively throughout India, in towns and cities and villages 
alike. Except for rural Bengal, which unhappily I have only rarely 
visited, I toured in every province and went deep into villages. 
I spoke of political and economic issues and judging from my 
speech I was full of politics and elections. But all this while, in a 
corner of my mind, lay something deeper and more vivid, and 
elections or the other excitements of the passing day meant little 
to it. Another and a major excitement had seized me, and I was 
again on a great voyage of discovery and the land of India and 
the people of India lay spread out before me. India with all her 
infinite charm and variety began to grow upon me more and more, 
and yet the more I saw of her, the more I realized how very diffi- 
cult it was for me or for anyone else to grasp the ideas she had 

58 



embodied. It was not her wide spaces that eluded me, or even her 
diversity, but some depth of soul which I could not fathom, though 
I had occasional and tantalizing glimpses of it. She was like some 
ancient palimpsest on which layer upon layer of thought and 
reverie had been inscribed, and yet no succeeding layer had com- 
pletely hidden or erased what had been written previously. All 
of these existed in our conscious or subconscious selves, though we 
may not have been aware of them, and they had gone to build 
up the complex and mysterious personality of India. That sphinx- 
like face with its elusive and sometimes mocking smile was to be 
seen throughout the length and breadth of the land. Though 
outwardly there was diversity and infinite variety among our people, 
everywhere there was that tremendous impress of oneness, which 
had held all of us together for ages past, whatever political fate or 
misfortune had befallen us. The unity of India was no longer 
merely an intellectual conception for me: it was an emotional 
experience which overpowered me. That essential unity had been 
so powerful that no political division, no disaster or catastrophe, 
had been able to overcome it. 

It was absurd, of course, to think of India or any country as 
a kind of anthropomorphic entity. I did not do so. I was also fully 
aware of the diversities and divisions of Indian life, of classes, 
castes, religions, races, different degrees of cultural development. 
Yet I think that a country with a long cultural background and a 
common outlook on life develops a spirit that is peculiar to it and 
that is impressed on all its children, however much they may 
differ among themselves. Can anyone fail to see this in China, 
whether he meets an old-fashioned mandarin or a Communist 
who has apparently broken with the past? It was this spirit of 
India that I was after, not through idle curiosity, though I was 
curious enough, but because I felt that it might give me some key 
to the understanding of my country and people, some guidance 
to thought and action. Politics and elections were day to day 
affairs when we grew excited over trumpery matters. But if we 
were going to build the house of India's future, strong and secure 
and beautiful, we would have to dig deep for the foundations. 

'Bharat Mata' 

Often, as I wandered from meeting to meeting, I spoke to my 
audience of this India of ours, of Hindustan and of Bharata, the 
old Sanskrit name derived from the mythical founder of the race. 
1 seldom did so in the cities, for there the audiences were more 
sophisticated and wanted stronger fare. But to the peasant, with 
his limited outlook, I spoke of this great country for whose free- 
dom we were struggling, of how each part differed from the other 

59 



and yet was India, of common problems of the peasants from 
north to south and east to west, of the Swaraj that could only be 
for all and every part and not for some. I told them of myjourney- 
ing from the Khyber Pass in the far north-west to Kanya Kumari 
or Cape Comorin in the distant south, and how everywhere the 
peasants put me identical questions, for their troubles were the 
same — poverty, debt, vested interests, landlords, moneylenders, 
heavy rents and taxes, police harassment, and all these wrapped 
up in the structure that the foreign government had imposed upon 
us — and relief must also come for all. I tried to make them think 
of India as a whole, and even to some little extent of this wide 
world of which we were a part. I brought in the struggle in China, 
in Spain, in Abyssinia, in Central Europe, in Egypt and the 
countries of Western Asia. I told them of the wonderful changes 
in the Soviet Union and of the great progress made in America. 
The task was not easy; yet it was not so difficult as I had imagined, 
for our ancient epics and myths and legends, which they knew so 
well, had made them familiar with the conception of their country, 
and some there were always who had travelled far and wide to 
the great places of pilgrimage situated at the four corners of 
India. Or there were old soldiers who had served in foreign parts 
in World War I or other expeditions. Even my references to foreign 
countries were brought home to them by the consequences of 
the great depression of the 'thirties. 

Sometimes as I reached a gathering, a great roar of welcome 
would greet me: Bharat Mata kt Jai — 'Victory to Mother India.' 
I would ask them unexpectedly what they meant by that cry, 
who was this Bharat Mata, Mother India, whose victory they 
wanted? My question would amuse them and surprise them, and 
then, not knowing exactly what to answer, they would look at 
each other and at me. I persisted in my questioning. At last a 
vigorous Jat, wedded to the soil from immemorial generations, 
would say that it was the dharli, the good earth of India, that 
they meant. What earth? Their particular village patch, or all 
the patches in the district or province, or in the whole of India? 
And so question and answer went on, till they would ask me 
impatiently to tell them all about it. I would endeavour to do 
so and explain that India was all this that they had thought, 
but it was much more. The mountains and the rivers of India, 
and the forests and the broad fields, which gave us food, were 
all dear to us, but what counted ultimately were the people of 
India, people like them and me, who were spread out all over 
this vast land. Bharat Mata, Mother India, was essentially these 
millions of people, and victory to her meant victory to these 
people. You are parts of this Bharat Mata, I told them, you are 
in a manner yourselves Bharat Mata, and as this idea slowly 
«0 



soaked into their brains, their eyes would light up as if they 
had made a great discovery. 

The Variety and Unity of India 

The diversity of India is tremendous; it is obvious; it lies on 
the surface and anybody can see it. It concerns itself with phy- 
sical appearances as well as with certain mental habits and traits. 
There is little in common, to outward seeming, between the 
Pathan of the North-West and the Tamil in the far South. Their 
racial stocks are not the same, though there may be common 
strands running through them; they differ in face and figure, 
food and clothing, and, of course, language. In the North- 
western Frontier Province there is already the breath of Central 
Asia, and many a custom there, as in Kashmir, reminds one of 
the countries on the other side of the Himalayas. Pathan popu- 
lar dances are singularly like Russian Cossack dancing. Yet, 
with all these differences, there is no mistaking the impress of 
India on the Pathan, as this is obvious on the Tamil. This is 
not surprising, for these border lands, and indeed Afghanistan 
also, were united with India for thousands of years. The old 
Turkish and other races who inhabited Afghanistan and parts 
of Central Asia before the advent of Islam were largely Bud- 
dhists, and earlier still, during the period of the Epics, 
Hindus. The frontier area was one of the principal centres of 
old Indian culture and it abounds still with ruins of monu- 
ments and monasteries and, especially, of the great university 
of Taxila, which was at the height of its fame two thousand 
years ago, attracting students from all over India as well as 
different parts of Asia. Changes of religion made a difference, 
but could not change entirely the mental backgrounds which 
the people of those areas had developed. 

The Pathan and the Tamil are two extreme examples; the 
others lie somewhere in between. All of them have their dis- 
tinctive features, all of them have still more the distinguishing 
mark of India. It is fascinating to find how the Bengalis, the 
Marathas, the Gujratis, the Tamils, the Andhras, the Oriyas, 
the Assamese, the Canarese, the Malayalis, the Sindhis, the 
Punjabis, the Pathans, the Kashmiris, the Rajputs, and the great 
central block comprising the Hindustani-speaking people, have 
retained their peculiar characteristics for hundreds of years, 
have still more or less the same virtues and failings of which 
old tradition or record tells us, and yet have been throughout 
these ages distinctively Indian, with the same national heritage 
and the same set of moral and mental qualities. There was 
something living and dynamic about this heritage which showed 

61 



itself in ways of living and a philosophical attitude to life and 
its problems. Ancient India, like ancient China, was a world in 
itself, a culture and a civilization which gave shape to all things. 
Foreign influences poured in and often influenced that culture 
and were absorbed. Disruptive tendencies gave rise immediately 
to an attempt to find a synthesis. Some kind of a dream of unity 
has occupied the mind of India since the dawn of civilization. 
That unity was not conceived as something imposed from out- 
side, a standardization of externals or even of beliefs. It was 
something deeper and, within its fold, the widest tolerance of 
belief and custom was practised and every variety acknowledged 
and even encouraged. 

Differences, big or small, can always be noticed even within 
a national group, however closely bound together it may be. 
The essential unity of that group becomes apparent when it is 
compared to another national group, though often the differ- 
ences between two adjoining groups fade out or intermingle 
near the frontiers, and modern developments are tending to 
produce a certain uniformity everywhere. In ancient and medi- 
aeval times, the idea of the modern nation was non-existent, and 
feudal, religious, racial, or cultural bonds had more importance. 
Yet I think that at almost any time in recorded history an Indian 
would have felt more or less at home in any part of India, and 
would have felt as a stranger and alien in any other country. He 
would certainly have felt less of a stranger in countries which had 
partly adopted his culture or religion. Those who professed a 
religion of non-Indian origin or, coming to India, settled down 
there, became distinctively Indian in the course of a few genera- 
tions, such as Christians, Jews, Parsees, Moslems. Indian converts 
to some of these religions never ceased to be Indians on account 
of a change of their faith. They were looked upon in other countries 
as Indians and foreigners, even though there might have been a 
community of faith between them. 

To-day, when the conception of nationalism has developed 
much more, Indians in foreign countries inevitably form a national 
group and hang together for various purposes, in spite of their 
internal differences. An Indian Christian is looked upon as an 
Indian wherever he may go. An Indian Moslem is considered an 
Indian in Turkey or Arabia or Iran, or any other country where 
Islam is the dominant religion- 
All of us, I suppose, have varying pictures of our native land 
and no two persons will think exactly alike. When I think of 
India, I think of many things: of broad fields dotted with in- 
numerable small villages; of towns and cities I have visited; of 
the magic of the rainy season which pours life into the dry parched- 
up land and converts it suddenly into a glistening expanse of 

62 



beauty and greenery, of great rivers and flowing water; of the 
Khyber Pass in all its bleak surroundings; of the southern tip of 
India; of people, individually and in the mass; and, above all, 
of the Himalayas, snow-capped, or some mountain valley in 
Kashmir in the spring, covered with new flowers, and with a 
brook bubbling and gurgling through it. We make and preserve 
the pictures of our choice, and so I have chosen this mountain 
background rather than the more normal picture of a hot, sub- 
tropical country. Both pictures would be correct, for India stret- 
ches from the tropics right up to the temperate regions, from 
near the equator to the cold heart of Asia. 

Travelling through India 

Towards the end of 1936 and in the early months of 1937 my 
touring progressively gathered speed and became frantic. I 
passed through this vast country like some hurricane, travel- 
ling night and day, always on the move, hardly staying any- 
where, hardly resting. There were urgent demands for me from 
all parts and time was limited, for the general elections were 
approaching and I was supposed to be an election-winner for 
others. I travelled mostly by automobile, partly by aeroplane 
and railway. Occasionally I had to use, for short distances, an 
elephant, a camel, or a horse; or travel by steamer, paddle-boat, 
or canoe; or use a bicycle; or go on foot. These odd and varied 
methods of transport sometimes became necessary in the interior, 
far from the beaten track. I carried a double set of microphones 
and loud speakers with me, for it was not possible to deal with 
the vast gatherings in any other way; nor indeed could I other- 
wise retain my voice. Those microphones went with me to all 
manner of strange places, from the frontiers of Tibet to the border 
of Baluchistan, where no such thing had ever been seen or heard 
of previously. 

From early morning till late at night I travelled from place 
to place where great gatherings awaited me, and in between 
these there were numerous stops where patient villagers stood 
to greet me. These were impromptu affairs, which upset my 
heavy programme and delayed all subsequent engagements; and 
yet how was it possible for me to rush by, unheeding and care- 
less of these humble folk? Delay was added to delay and, at the 
big open-air gatherings, it took many minutes for me to pass 
through the crowds to the platform, and later to come away. 
Every minute counted, and the minutes piled up on top of each 
other and became hours; so that by the time evening came I was 
several hours late. But the crowd was waiting patiently, though 
it was winter and they sat and shivered in the open, insufficiently 

63 



clad as they were. My day's programme would thus prolong 
itself to eighteen hours and we would reach our journey's end for 
the day at midnight or after. Once in the Karnatak, in mid- 
February, we passed all bounds and broke our own records. The 
day's programme was a terribly heavy one and we had to pass 
through a very beautiful mountain forest with winding and none- 
too-good roads, which could only be tackled slowly. There were 
half-a-dozen monster meetings and many smaller ones. We 
began the day by a function at eight in the morning; our last 
engagement was at 4 a.m. (it should have been seven hours earlier), 
and then we had to cover another seventy miles before we reached 
our resting place for the night. We arrived at 7 a.m., having 
covered 415 miles that day and night, apart from numerous meet- 
ings. It had been a twenty-three-hour day and an hour later I 
had to begin my next day's programme. 

Someone took the trouble to estimate that during these months 
some ten million persons actually attended the meetings I addressed, 
while some additional millions were brought into some kind of 
touch with me during myjourneys by road. The biggest gatherings 
would consist of about one hundred thousand persons, while 
audiences of twenty thousand were fairly common. Occasionally 
in passing through a small town I would be surprised to notice 
that it was almost deserted and the shops were closed. The explana- 
tion came to me when I saw that almost the entire population 
of the town, men, women, and even children, had gathered at the 
meeting-place, on the other side of the town, and were waiting 
patiently for my arrival. 

How I managed to carry on in this way without physical 
collapse, I cannot understand now, for it was a prodigious feat 
of physical endurance. Gradually, I suppose, my system adapted 
itself to this vagrant life. I would sleep heavily in the automo- 
bile for half an hour between two meetings and find it hard to 
wake up. Yet I had to get up and the sight of a great cheering 
crowd would finally wake me. I reduced my meals to a minimum 
and often dropped a meal, especially in the evenings, feeling the 
better for it. But what kept me up and filled me with vitality 
was the vast enthusiasm and affection that surrounded me and 
met me everywhere I went. I was used to it, and yet I could never 
get quite used to it, and every new day brought its surprises. 

General Elections 

My tour was especially concerned with the general elections all 
over India that were approaching. But I did not take kindly to 
the usual methods and devices that accompany electioneering. 
Elections were an essential and inseparable part of the democ- 

64 



ratic process and there was no way of doing away with them. 

Yet, often enough, elections brought out the evil side of man, 
and it was obvious that they did not always lead to the success 
of the better man. Sensitive persons, and those who were not 
prepared to adopt rough-and-ready methods to push themselves 
forward, were at a disadvantage and preferred to avoid these 
contests. Was democracy then to be a close preserve of those 
possessing thick skins and loud voices and accommodating con- 
sciences ? 

Especially were these election evils most prevalent where the 
electorate was small; many of them vanished, or at any rate 
were not so obvious, when the electorate was a big one. It was 
possible for the biggest electorate to be swept off its feet on a 
false issue, or in the name of religion (as we saw later), but there 
were usually some balancing factors which helped to prevent the 
grosser evils. My experience in this matter confirmed my faith 
in the widest possible franchise. I was prepared to trust that 
wide electorate far more than a restricted one, based on a pro- 
perty qualification or even an educational test. The property 
qualification was anyhow bad; as for education it was obviously 
desirable and necessary. But I have not discovered any special 
qualities in a literate or slightly educated person which would 
entitle his opinion to greater respect than that of a sturdy peasant, 
illiterate but full of a limited kind of common sense. In any event, 
where the chief problem is that of the peasant, his opinion is far 
more important. I am a convinced believer in adult franchise, 
for men and women, and, though I realize the difficulties in the 
way, I am sure that the objections raised to its adoption in India 
have no great force and are based on the fears of privileged classes 
and interests. 

The general elections in 1937 for the provincial assemblies 
were based on a restricted franchise affecting about twelve per 
cent of the population. But even this was a great improvement 
on the previous franchise, and nearly thirty millions all over 
India, apart from the Indian States, were now entitled to vote. 
The scope of these elections was vast and comprised the whole 
of India, minus the States. Every province had to elect its 
Provincial Assembly, and in most provinces there were two 
Houses, and there were thus two sets of elections. The number 
of candidates ran into many thousands. 

My approach to these elections, and to some extent the 
approach of most Congressmen, was different from the usual 
one. I did not trouble myself about the individual candidates, 
but wanted rather to create a country-wide atmosphere in favour 
of our national movement for freedom as represented by the 
Congress, and for the programme contained in our election 

65 



manifesto. I felt that if we succeeded in this, all would be well; 
if not, then it did not matter much if an odd candidate won or 
lost. 

My appeal was an ideological one and I hardly referred to the 
candidates, except as standard-bearers of our cause. I knew 
many of them, but there were many I did not know at all, and 
I saw no reason why I should burden my mind with hundreds 
of names. I asked for votes for the Congress, for the indepen- 
dence of India, and for the struggle for independence. I made 
no promises, except to promise unceasing struggle till freedom 
was attained. I told people to vote for us only if they under- 
stood and accepted our objective and our programme, and were 
prepared to live up to them; not otherwise. I charged them not 
to vote for the Congress if they disagreed with this objective or 
programme. We wanted no false votes, no votes for particular 
persons because they liked them. Votes and elections would not 
take us far; they were just small steps in a long journey, and to 
delude us with votes, without intelligent acceptance of what they 
signified or willingness for subsequent action, was to play us false 
and be untrue to our country. Individuals did not count, though 
we wanted good and true individuals to represent us; it was the 
cause that counted, the organization that represented it, and 
the nation to whose freedom we were pledged. I analysed that 
freedom and what it should mean to the hundreds of millions of 
our people. We wanted no change of masters from white to brown, 
but a real people's rule, by the people and for the people, and an 
ending of our poverty and misery. 

That was the burden of my speeches, and only in that imper- 
sonal way could I fit myself into the election campaign. I was 
not greatly concerned with the prospects of particular candi- 
dates. My concern was with a much bigger issue. As a matter 
of fact that approach was the right one even from the narrower 
point of view of a particular candidate's success. For thus he and 
his election were lifted up to a higher and more elemental level 
of a great nation's fight for freedom, and millions of poverty- 
stricken people striving to put an end to their ancient curse of 
poverty. These ideas, expressed by scores of leading Congressmen, 
came and spread like a mighty wind fresh from the sea, sweeping 
away all petty ideas and electioneering stunts. I knew my people 
and liked them, and their million eyes had taught me much of 
mass psychology. 

I was talking about the elections front day to day, and yet the 
elections seldom occupied my mind; they floated about super- 
ficially on the surface. Nor was I particularly concerned with 
the voters only. I was getting into touch with something much 
bigger: the people of India in their millions; and such message 

66 



as I had was meant for them all, whether they were voters or 
not; for every Indian, man, woman, and child. The excitement 
of this adventure held me, this physical and emotional com- 
munion with vast numbers of people. It was not the feeling of 
being in a crowd, one among many, and being swayed by the 
impulses of the crowd. My eyes held those thousands of eyes: 
we looked at each other, not as strangers meeting for the first 
time, but with recognition, though of what this was none could 
say. As I saluted them with a namaskar, the palms of my hands 
joined together in front of me, a forest of hands went up in salu- 
tation, and a friendly, personal smile appeared on their faces, 
and a murmur of greeting rose from that assembled multitude 
and enveloped me in its warm embrace. I spoke to them and 
my voice carried the message I had brought, and I wondered 
how far they understood my words or the ideas that lay behind 
them. Whether they understood all I said or not, I could not say, 
but there was a light of a deeper understanding in their eyes, 
which seemed to go beyond spoken words. 

The Culture of the Masses 

Thus I saw the moving drama of the Indian people in the present, 
and "ould often trace the threads which bound their lives to the 
past, even while their eyes were turned towards the future. 
Everywhere I found a cultural background which had exerted 
a powerful influence on their lives. This background was a mix- 
ture of popular philosophy, tradition, history, myth, and legend, 
and it was not possible to draw a line between any of these. Even 
the entirely uneducated and illiterate shared this background. 
The old epics of India, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata and 
other books, in popular translations and paraphrases, were widely 
known among the masses, and every incident and story and moral 
in them was engraved on the popular mind and gave a richness 
and content to it. Illiterate villagers would know hundreds of 
verses by heart and their conversation would be full of references to 
them or to some story with a moral, enshrined in some old classic. 
Often I was surprised by some such literary turn given by a group 
of villagers to a simple talk about present-day affairs. If my mind 
was full of pictures from recorded history and more-or-less ascer- 
tained fact, I realised that even the illiterate peasant had a picture 
gallery in his mind, though this was largely drawn from myth 
and tradition and epic heroes and heroines, and only very little 
from history. Neverthless, it was vivid enough. 

I looked at their faces and their figures and watched their 
movements. There was many a sensitive face and many a sturdy 
body, straight and clean-limbed; and among the women there 
was grace and suppleness and dignity and poise and, very often, 

67 



a look that was full of melancholy. Usually the finer physical 
types were among the upper castes, who were just a little better 
off in the economic sense. Sometimes, as I was passing along 
a country road, or through a village, I would start with surprise 
on seeing a fine type of man, or a beautiful woman, who reminded 
me of some fresco of ancient times. And I wondered how the type 
endured and continued through ages, in spite of all the horror 
and misery that India had gone through. What could we not do 
with these people under better conditions and with greater oppor- 
tunities opening out to them? 

There was poverty and the innumerable progeny of poverty 
everywhere, and the mark of this beast was on every forehead. 
Life had been crushed and distorted and made into a thing of 
evil, and many vices had flowed from this distortion and contin- 
uous lack and ever-present insecurity. All this was not pleasant 
to see; yet that was the basic reality in India. There was far too 
much of the spirit of resignation and acceptance of things as they 
were. But there was also a mellowness and a gentleness, the cul- 
tural heritage of thousands of years, which no amount of misfor- 
tune had been able to rub off. 

Two Lives 

In this and other ways I tried to discover India, the India of the 
past and of the present, and I made my mood receptive to impres- 
sions and to the waves of thought and feeling that came to me 
from living beings as well as those who had long ceased to be. 
I tried to identify myself for a while with this unending procession, 
at the tail end of which I, too, was struggling along. And then 
I would separate myself and as from a hill-top, apart, look down 
at the valley below. 

To what purpose was all this long journeying? To what end 
these unending processions? A feeling of tiredness and disillu- 
sion would sometimes invade my being, and then I would seek 
escape from it in cultivating a certain detachment. Slowly my 
mind had prepared itself for this, and I had ceased to attach 
much value to myself or to what happened to me. Or so I thought, 
and to some extent I succeeded, though not much, I fear, as there is 
too much of a volcano within me for real detachment. Unexpec- 
tedly all my defences are hurled away and all my detachment goes. 

But even the partial success I achieved was very helpful and, 
in the midst of activity, I could separate myself from it and look 
at it as a thing apart. Sometimes, I would steal an hour or two, 
and forgetting my usual preoccupations, retire into that cloistered 
chamber of my mind and live, for a while, another life. And so, 
in a way, these two lives marched together, inseparably tied up 
with one another, and yet apart. 

68 



CHAPTER FOUR 

THE DISCOVERY OF INDIA 
The Indus Valley Civilization 



THE INDUS VALLEY CIVILIZATION, OF WHICH IMPRESSIVE REMAINS 

have been discovered at Mohenjo-daro in Sind and at Harappa 
in the Western Punjab, is the earliest picture that' we have of 
India's past. These excavations have revolutionised the concep- 
tion of ancient history. Unfortunately, a few years after this work 
of excavation began in these areas, it was stopped, and for the 
last thirteen years or so nothing significant has been done. The 
stoppage was initially due to the great depression of the early 
'thirties. Lack of funds was pleaded, although there was never 
any lack for the display of imperial pomp and splendour. The 
coming of World War II effectively stopped all activity, and 
even the work of preservation of all that has been dug out has 
been rather neglected. Twice I have visited Mohenjo-daro, in 
1931 and 1936. During my second visit I found that the rain and 
the dry sandy air had already injured many of the buildings that 
had been dug out. After being preserved for over five thousand 
years under a covering of sand and soil, they were rapidly 
disintegrating owing to exposure, and very little was being done 
to preserve these priceless relics of ancient times. The officer of 
the archaeological department in charge of the place complained 
that he was allowed practically no funds or other help or material 
to enable him to keep the excavated buildings as they were. 
What has happened during these last eight years I do not know, 
but I imagine that the wearing away has continued, and within 
another few years many of the characteristic features of Mohenjo- 
daro will have disappeared. 

That is a tragedy for which there is no excuse, and something 
that can never be replaced will have gone, leaving only pictures 
and written descriptions to remind us of what it was. 

Mohenjo-daro and Harappa are far apart. It was sheer chance 
that led to the discovery of these ruins in these two places. There 
can be little doubt that there lie many such buried cities and 
other remains of the handiwork of ancient man in between these 
two areas; that, in fact, this civlization was widespread over large 

69 



parts of India, certainly of North India. A time may come when 
this work of uncovering the distant past of India is again taken 
in hand and far-reaching discoveries are made. Already remains 
of this civilization have been found as far apart as Kathiawar in 
the west and the Ambala district of the Punjab, and there is reason 
for believing that it spread to the Gangetic Valley. Thus it was 
something much more than an Indus Valley civilization. The 
inscriptions found at Mohenjo-daro have so far not been fully 
deciphered. 

But what we know, even thus far, is of the utmost significance. 
The Indus Valley civilization, as We find it, was highly developed 
and must have taken thousands of years to reach that stage. It 
was, surprisingly enough, a predominantly secular civilization, 
and the religious element, though present, did not dominate the 
scene. It was clearly also the precursor of later cultural periods in 
India. 

Sir John Marshall tells us»: 'One thing that stands out clear 
and unmistakable both at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa is that 
the civilization hitherto revealed at these two places is not an 
incipient civilization, but one already age-old and stereotyped 
on Indian soil, with many millenniums of human endeavour 
behind it. Thus India must henceforth be recognised, along with 
Persia, Mesopotamia, and Egypt, as one of the most important 
areas where the civilizing processes were initiated and developed.' 
And, again, he says that 'the Punjab and Sind, if not other parts 
of India as well, were enjoying an advanced and singularly uni- 
form civilization of their own, closely akin, but in some respects 
even superior, to that of contemporary Mesopotamia and Egypt.' 

These people of the Indus Valley had many contacts with the 
Sumerian civilization of that period, and there is even some evi- 
dence of an Indian colony, probably of merchants, at Akkad. 
'Manufactures from the Indus cities reached even the markets 
on the Tigris and Euphrates. Conversely, a few Sumerian devices 
in art, Mesopotamia toilet sets, and a cylinder seal were copied 
on the Indus. Trade was not confined to raw materials and luxury 
articles; fish, regularly imported from the Arabian Sea coasts, 
augmented the food supplies of Mohenjo-daro.'* 

Cotton was used for textiles even at that remote period in India. 
Marshall compares and contrasts the Indus Valley civilization 
with those of contemporary Egypt and Mesopotamia: 'Thus, 
to mention only a few salient points, the use of cotton for textiles 
was exclusively restricted at this period to India and was not 
extended to the western world until 2,000 or 3,000 years later. 
Again, there is nothing that we know of in prehistoric Egypt or 

*Gordon Childe. 'What Happened in Historyp. 112 (Pelican Books, 1943). 
70 



Mesopotamia or anywhere else in western Asia to compare with 
the well-built baths and commodious houses of the citizens of 
Mohenjo-daro. In these countries much money and thought were 
lavished on the building of magnificent temples for the gods and 
on the palaces and tombs of kings, but the rest of the people 
seemingly had to content themselves with insignificant dwellings 
of mud. In the Indus Valley the picture is reversed and the finest 
structures are those erected for the convenience of the citizens.' 
These public and private baths, as well as the excellent drainage 
system we find at Mohenjo-daro, are the first of their kind yet dis- 
covered anywhere. There are also two-storied private houses, 
made of baked bricks, with bath-rooms and a porter's lodge, as 
well as tenements. 

Yet another quotation from Marshall, the acknowledged autho- 
rity on the Indus Valley civilization, who was himself responsible 
for the excavations. He says that 'equally peculiar to the Indus 
Valley and stamped with an individual character of their own 
are its art and its religion. Nothing that we know of in other 
countries at this period bears any resemblance, in point of style, 
to the faience models of rams, dogs, and other animals, or to ths 
intaglio engravings on the seals, the best of which — notably the 
humped and shorthorn bulls — are distinguished by a breadth of 
treatment and a feeling for a line and plastic form that have rarely 
been surpassed in glyptic art; nor would it be possible, until the 
classic age of Greece, to match the exquisitely supple modelling 
of the two human statuettes from Harappa. . . .In the religion of 
the Indus people there is much, of course, that might be paralleled 
in other countries. This is true of every prehistoric and most historic 
religions as well. But, taken as a whole, their religion is so charac- 
teristically Indian as hardly to be distinguished from still living 
Hinduism.' 

We find thus this Indus Valley civilization connected and trad- 
ing with its sister civilizations of Persia, Mesopotamia, and Egypt, 
and superior to them in some ways. It was an urban civilization, 
where the merchant class was wealthy and evidently played an 
important role. The streets, lined with stalls and what were 
probably small shops, give the impression of an Indian bazaar 
of to-day. Professor Childe says: 'It would seem to follow that the 
craftsmen of the Indus cities were, to a large extent, producing 
"for the market." What, if any, form of currency and standard of 
value had been accepted by society to facilitate the exchange of 
, commodities is, however, uncertain. Magazines attached to many 
spacious and commodious private houses mark their owners as 
merchants. Their number and size indicate a strong and pros- 
perous merchant community.' 'A surprising wealth of ornaments 
of gold, silver, precious stones and faience, of vessels of beaten 

71 



copper and of metal implements and weapons, has been collected 
from the ruins.' Childe adds that 'well-planned streets and a magni- 
ficent system of drains, regularly cleared out, reflect the vigilance 
of some regular municipal government. Its authority was strong 
enough to secure the observance of town-planning by-laws and the 
maintenance of approved lines for streets and lanes over several 
reconstructions rendered necessary by floods.'* 

Between this Indus Valley civilization and to-day in India 
there are many gaps and periods about which we know little. 
The links joining one period to another are not always evident, 
and a very great deal has of course happened and innumerable 
changes have taken place. But there is always an underlying sense 
of continuity, of an unbroken chain which joins modern India to 
the far distant period of six or seven thousand years ago when the 
Indus Valley civilization probably began. It is surprising how 
much there is in Mohenjo-daro and Harappa which reminds one 
of persisting traditions and habits — popular ritual, craftsmanship, 
even some fashions in dress. Much of this influenced Western Asia. 

It is interesting to note that at this dawn of India's story, she 
does not appear as a puling infant, but already grown up in 
many ways. She is not oblivious of life's ways, lost in dreams of a 
vague and unrealizable supernatural world, but has made con- 
siderable technical progress in the arts and amenities of life, creat- 
ing not only things of beauty, but also the utilitarian and more 
typical emblems of modern civilization — good baths and drainage 
systems. 

The Coining of the Aryans 

Who were these people of the Indus Valley civilization and 
whence had they come? We do not know yet. It is quite possible, 
and even probable, that their culture was an indigenous culture 
and its roots and offshoots may be found even in southern India. 
Some scholars find an essential similarity between these people 
and the Dravidian races and culture of south India. Even if there 
was some ancient migration to India, this could only have taken 
place some thousands ofyears before the date assigned to Mohenjo- 
daro. For all practical purposes we can treat them as the indigen- 
ous inhabitants of India. 

What happened to the Indus Valley civilization and how did 
it end? Some people (among them, Gordon Childe) say that 
there was a sudden end to it due to an unexplained catastrophe. 
The river Indus is well-known for its mighty floods which over- 
whelm and wash away cities and villages. Or a changing climate 

"Gordon Childe. 'What Happened in History,' p. 113, 114. 
72 



might lead to a progressive desiccation of the land and the 
encroachment of the desert over cultivated areas. The ruins of 
Mohenjo-daro are themselves evidence of layer upon layer of 
sand being deposited, raising the ground level of the city and 
compelling the inhabitants to build higher on the old founda- 
tions. Some excavated houses have the appearance of two- or 
three-storied structures, and yet they represent a periodic raising 
of the walls to keep pace with the rising level. The province of 
Sind we know was rich and fertile in ancient times, but from 
mediaeval times onwards it has been largely desert. 

It is probable, therefore, that these climatic changes had a 
marked effect on the people of those areas and their ways of 
living. And in any event climatic changes must have only affected 
a relatively small part of the area of this widespread urban civi- 
lization, which, as we have now reason to believe, spread right 
up to the Gangetic Valley, and possibly even beyond. We have 
really not sufficient data to judge. Sand, which probably over- 
whelmed and covered some of these ancient cities, also preserved 
them; while other cities and evidences of the old civilization 
gradually decayed and went to pieces in the course of ages. Per- 
haps future archaeological discoveries might disclose more links 
with later ages. 

While there is a definite sense of continuity between the Indus 
Valley civilization and later periods, there is also a kind of break 
or a gap, not only in point of time but also in the kind of civiliza- 
tion that came next. This latter was probably more agricultural 
to begin with, though towns existed and there was some kind of 
city life also. This emphasis on the agricultural aspect may have 
been given to it by the newcomers, the Aryans who poured into 
India in successive waves from the north-west. 

The Aryan migrations are supposed to have taken place about 
a thousand years after the Indus Valley period; and yet it is 
possible that there was no considerable gap and tribes and peoples 
came to India from the north-west from time to time, as they did 
in later ages, and became absorbed in India. We might say that 
the first great cultural synthesis and fusion took place between the 
incoming Aryans and the Dravidians, who were probably the 
representatives of the Indus Valley civilization. Out ofthis syn- 
thesis and fusion grew the Indian races and the basic Indian 
culture, which had distinctive elements of both. In the ages that 
followed there came many other races: Iranians, Greeks, Parthians, 
Bactrians, Scythians, Huns, Turks (before Islam), early Christians, 
Jews, Zoroastrians; they came, made a difference, and were 
absorbed. India was, according to Dodwell, 'infinitely absorbent 
like the ocean.' It is odd to think of India, with her caste system 
and exclusiveness, having this astonishing inclusive capacity to 

73 



absorb foreign races and cultures. Perhaps it was due to this that 
she retained her vitality and rejuvenated herself from time to time. 
The Moslems, when they came, were also powerfully affected by 
her. 'The foreigners (Muslim Turks),' says Vincent Smith, 'like 
their forerunners the Sakas and the Yueh-chi, universally yielded 
to the wonderful assimilative power of Hinduism, and rapidly 
became Hinduised.' 

What is Hinduism? 

In this quotation Vincent Smith has used the words 'Hinduism' 
and 'Hinduised'. I do not think it is correct to use them in this 
way unless they are used in the widest sense of Indian culture. 
They are apt to mislead to-day when they are associated with a 
much narrower, and specifically religious, concept. The word 
'Hindu' does not occur at all in our ancient literature. The first 
reference to it in an Indian book is, I am told, in a Tantrik work 
of the eighth century A.C., where 'Hindu' means a people and 
not the followers of a particular religion. But it is clear that the 
word is a very old one, as it occurs in the Avesta and in old Persian. 
It was used then and for a thousand years or more later by the 
peoples of western and central Asia for India, or rather for the 
people living on the other side of the Indus river. The word is 
clearly derived from Sindhu, the old, as well as the present, Indian 
name for the Indus. From this Sindhu came the words Hindu and 
Hindustan, as well as Indus and India. 

The famous Chinese pilgrim I-tsing, who came to India in the 
seventh century A.c, writes in his record of travels that the 
'northern tribes', that is the people of Central Asia, called India 
'Hindu' (Hsin-tu) but, he adds, 'this is not at all a common 
name. ..and the most suitable name for India is the Noble Land 
(Aryadesha).' The use of the word 'Hindu' in connection with 
a particular religion is of very late occurrence. 

The old inclusive term for religion in India was Arya dharma. 
Dharma really means something more than religion. It is from 
a root word which means to hold together; it is the inmost consti- 
tution ofa thing, the law ofits inner being. It is an ethical concept 
which includes the moral code, righteousness, and the whole range 
of man's duties and responsibilities. Arya dharma would include 
all the faiths (Vedic and non-Vedic) that originated in India; 
it was used by Buddhists and Jains as well as by those who 
accepted the Vedas. Buddha always called his way to salvation 
the 'Aryan Path'. 

The expression Vedic dharma was also used in ancient times to 
signify more particularly and exclusively all those philosophies, 
moral teachings, ritual and practices, which were supposed to 

74 



derive from the Vedas. Thus all those who acknowledged the 
general authority of the Vedas could be said to belong to the 
Vedic dharma. 

Sanatana dharma, meaning the ancient religion, could be 
applied to any of the ancient Indian faiths (including Buddhism 
and Jainism), but the expression has been more or less mono- 
polized to-day by some orthodox sections among the Hindus who 
claim to follow the ancient faith. 

Buddhism and Jainism were certainly not Hinduism oj- even 
the Vedic dharma. Yet they arose in India and were integral 
parts of Indian life, culture and philosophy. A Buddhist or Jain 
in India is a hundred per cent product of Indian thought and 
culture, yet neither is a Hindu by faith. It is, therefore, entirely 
misleading to refer to Indian culture as Hindu culture. In later 
ages this culture was greatly influenced by the impact of Islam, 
and yet it remained basically and distinctively Indian. To-day 
it is experiencing in a hundred ways the powerful effect of the 
industrial civilization, which rose in the west, and it is difficult 
to say with any precision what the outcome will be. 

Hinduism, as a faith, is vague, amorphous, many-sided, all 
things to all men. It is hardly possible to define it, or indeed to 
say definitely whether it is a religion or not, in the usual sense 
of the word. In its present form, and even in the past, it embraces 
many beliefs and practices, from the highest to the lowest, often 
opposed to or contradicting each other. Its essential spirit seems 
to be to live and let live. Mahatma Gandhi has attempted to 
define it: 'If I were asked to define the Hindu creed, I should 
simply say: Search after truth through nonviolent means. A 
man may not believe in God and still call himselfa Hindu. Hindu- 
ism is a relentless pursuit after truth. ..Hinduism is the religion 
of truth. Truth is God. Denial of God we have known. Denial of 
truth we have not known.' Truth and non-violence, so says 
Gandhi: but many eminent and undoubted Hindus say that non- 
violence, as Gandhi understands it, is 110 essential part of the Hindu 
creed. We thus have truth left by itself as the distinguishing mark 
of Hinduism. That, of course, is no definition at all. 

It is, therefore, incorrect and undesirable to use 'Hindu' or 
'Hinduism' for Indian culture, even with reference to the distant 
past, although the various aspects of thought, as embodied in 
ancient writings, were the dominant expression of that culture. 
Much more is it incorrect to use those terms, in that sense, to- 
day. So long as the old faith and philosophy were chiefly a way of 
life and an outlook on the world, they were largely synonymous 
with Indian culture; but when a more rigid religion developed, 
with all manner of ritual and ceremonial, it became something 
more and at the same time something much less than that compo- 

75 



site culture. A Christian or a Moslem could, and often did, adapt 
himself to the Indian way of life and culture, and yet remained 
in faith an orthodox Christian or Moslem. He had Indianized 
himself and become an Indian without changing his religion. 

The correct word for 'Indian', as applied to country or culture 
or the historical continuity of our varying traditions, is 'Hindi', 
from 'Hind', a shortened form of Hindustan. Hind is still com- 
monly used for India. In the countries of Western Asia, in Iran 
and Turkey, in Iraq, Afghanistan, Egypt, and elsewhere, India 
has always been referred to, and is still called. Hind; and every- 
thing Indian is called 'Hindi'. 'Hindi' has nothing to do with 
religion, and a Moslem or Christian Indian is as much a Hindi 
as a person who follows Hinduism as a religion. Americans who 
call all Indians Hindus are not far wrong; they would be per- 
fectly correct if they used the word 'Hindi'. Unfortunately, the 
word 'Hindi' has become associated in India with a particular 
script — the devanagri script of Sanskrit — and so it has become 
difficult to use it in its larger and more natural significance. 
Perhaps when present-day controversies subside we may revert 
to its original and more satisfying use. To-day, the word 'Hin- 
dustani' is used for Indian; it is, of course, derived from Hin- 
dustan. But this is too much of a mouthful and it has no such 
historical and cultural associations as 'Hindi' has. It would cer- 
tainly appear odd to refer to ancient periods of Indian culture 
as 'Hindustani'. 

Whatever the word we may use, Indian or Hindi or Hindus- 
tani, for our cultural tradition, we see in the past that some inner 
urge towards synthesis, derived essentially from the Indian philo- 
sophic outlook, was the dominant feature of Indian cultural, and 
even racial, development. Each incursion of foreign elements 
was a challenge to this culture, but it was met successfully by a 
new synthesis and a process of absorption. This was also a process 
of rejuvenation and new blooms of culture arose out of it, the back- 
ground and essential basis, however, remaining much the same. 

The Earliest Records, Scripture and Mythology 

Before the discovery of the Indus Valley civilization, the Vedas 
were supposed to be the earliest records we possess of Indian 
culture. There was much dispute about the chronology of the 
Vedic period, European scholars usually giving later dates and 
Indian scholars much earlier ones. It was curious, this desire on 
the part of Indians to go as far back as possible and thus enhance 
the importance of our ancient culture. Professor Winternitz 
thinks that the beginnings of Vedic literature go back to 2,000 

76 



B.C., or even 2,500 B.C. This brings us very near the Mohenjo- 
daro period. 

The usual date accepted by most scholars to-day for the hymns 
of the Rig Veda is 1,500 B.C., but there is a tendency, ever since 
the Mohenjo-daro excavations, to date further back these early 
Indian scripture's. Whatever the exact date may be, it is probable 
that this literature is earlier than that of either Greece or Israel, 
that, in fact, it represents some of the earliest documents of the 
human mind that we possess. Max Miiller has called it: 'The 
first word spoken by the Aryan man.' 

The Vedas were the outpourings of the Aryans as they stream- 
ed into the rich land of India. They brought their ideas with 
them from that common stock out of which grew the Avesta in 
Iran, and elaborated them in the soil of India. Even the lang- 
uage of the Vedas bears a striking resemblance to that of the 
Avesta, and it has been remarked that the Avesta is nearer the 
Veda than the Veda is to its own epic Sanskrit. 

How are we to consider the scripture of various religions, 
much of it believed by its votaries to be revealed scripture? To 
analyse it and criticize it and look upon it as a human document 
is often to offend the true believers. Yet there is no other way to 
consider it. 

I have always hesitated to read books of religion. The totali- 
tarian claims made on their behalf did not appeal to me. The 
outward evidences of the practice of religion that I saw did not 
encourage me to go to the original sources. Yet I had to drift to 
these books, for ignorance of them was not a virtue and was 
often a severe drawback. I knew that some of them had power- 
fully influenced humanity and anything that could have done 
so must have some inherent power and virtue in it, some vital 
source of energy. I found great difficulty in reading through 
many parts of them, for try as I would, I could not arouse suffi- 
cient interest; but the sheer beauty of some passages would hold 
me. And then a phrase or a sentence would suddenly leap up 
and electrify me and make me feel the presence of the really 
great. Some words of the Buddha or of Christ would shine out 
with deep meaning and seem to me applicable as much to-day 
as when they were uttered 2,000 or more years ago. There was a 
compelling reality about them, a permanence which time and 
space could not touch. So I felt sometimes when I read about 
Socrates or the Chinese philosophers, and also when I read the 
Upanishads and the Bhagavad Gita. I was not interested in the 
metaphysics, or the description of ritual, or the many other things 
which apparently had no relation to the problems that faced me. 
Perhaps I did not understand the inner significance of much that 
I read, and sometimes, indeed, a second reading threw more light. 

77 



I made no real effort to understand mysterious passages and I 
passed by those which had no particular significance for me. 
Nor was I interested in long commentaries and glossaries. I could 
not approach these books, or any book, as Holy Writ which 
must be accepted in their totality without challenge or demur. 
Indeed, this approach of Holy Writ visually resulted in my mind 
being closed to what they contained. I was much more friendly 
and open to them when I could consider them as having been 
written by human beings, very wise and far-seeing, but neverthe- 
less ordinary mortals, and not incarnations or mouthpieces of a 
divinity, about whom I had no knowledge or surety whatever. 

It has always seemed to me a much more magnificent and 
impressive thing that a human being should rise to great heights, 
mentally and spiritually, and should then seek to raise others 
up, rather than that he should be the mouthpiece of a divine or 
superior power. Some of the founders of religions were astonish- 
ing individuals, but all their glory vanishes in my eyes when I 
cease to think of them as human beings. What impresses me and 
gives me hope is the growth of the mind and spirit ofman, and not 
his being used as an agent to convey a message. 

Mythology affected me in much the same way. If people be- 
lieved in the factual content of these stories, the whole thing 
was absurd and ridiculous. But as soon as one ceased believing 
in them, they appeared in a new light, a new beauty, a wonder- 
ful flowering of a richly endowed imagination, full of human 
lessons. No one believes now in the stories of Greek gods and 
goddesses and so, without any difficulty, we can admire them 
and they become part of our mental heritage. But if we had to 
believe in them, what a burden it would be, and how, oppressed 
by this weight of belief, we would often miss their beauty. Indian 
mythology is richer, vaster, very beautiful, and full of meaning. 
I have often wondered what manner ofmen and women they were 
who gave shape to these bright dreams and lovely fancies, and 
out of what gold mine of thought and imagination they dug 
them. 

Looking at scripture then as a product of the human mind, we 
have to remember the age in which it was written, the environ- 
ment and mental climate in which it grew, the vast distance in 
time and thought and experience that separates it from us. We 
have to forget the trappings of ritual and religious usage in 
which it is wrapped, and remember the social background in 
which it expanded. Many of the problems of human life have a 
permanence and a touch of eternity about them, and hence the 
abiding interest in these ancient books. But they dealt with other 
problems also, limited to their particular age, which have no 
living interest for us now. 

78 



The Vedas 

Many Hindus look upon the Vedas as revealed scripture. This 
seen;; to me to be peculiarly unfortunate, for thus we miss their 
real significance — the unfolding of the human mind in the 
earliest stages of thought. And what a wonderful mind it was! 
The Vedas (from the root vid, to know) were simply meant to 
be a collection of the existing knowledge of the day; they are a 
jumble of many things: hymns, prayers, ritual for sacrifice, 
magic, magnificent nature poetry. There is no idolatory in them; 
no temples for the gods. The vitality and affirmation of life 
pervading them are extraordinary. The early Vedic Aryans were 
so full of the zest for life that they paid little attention to the soul. 
In a vague way they believed in some kind of existence after 
death. 

Gradually the conception of God grows: there are the Olym- 
pian type of gods, and then monotheism, and later, rather mixed 
with it, the conception of monism. Thought carries them to 
strange realms, and brooding on nature's mystery comes, and 
the spirit of inquiry. These developments take place in the 
course of hundreds of years, and by the time we reach the end 
of the Veda, the Vedanta (anta, meaning end), we have the philo- 
sophy of the Upanishads. 

The Rig Veda, the first of the Vedas, is probably the earliest 
book that humanity possesses. In it we can find the first out- 
pourings of the human mind, the glow of poetry, the rapture 
at nature's loveliness and mystery. And in these early hymns 
there are, as Dr. Macnicol says, the beginnings of 'the brave 
adventures made so long ago and recorded here, of those who 
seek to discover the significance of our world and of man's life 
within it.... India here set out on a quest which she has never 
ceased to follow.' 

Yet behind the Rig Veda itself lay ages of civilized existence 
and thought, during which the Indus Valley and the Meso- 
potamian and other civilizations had grown. It is appropriate, 
therefore, that there should be this dedication in the Rig Veda: 
'To the Seers, our ancestors, the first path-finders!' 

These Vedic hymns have been described by Rabindranath 
Tagore as 'a poetic testament of a people's collective reaction 
to the wonder and awe of existence. A people of vigorous and 
unsophisticated imagination awakened at the very dawn of civi- 
lization to a sense of the inexhaustible mystery that is implicit 
in life. It was a simple faith of theirs that attributed divinity to 
every element and force of nature, but it was a brave and joyous 
one, in which the sense of mystery only gave enchantment to 
life, without weighing it down with bafflement — the faith of a 

79 



race unburdened with intellectual brooding on the conflicting 
diversity of the objective universe, though now and again illu- 
mined by intuitive experience as: "Truth is one: (though) the 
wise call it by various names." ' 

But that brooding spirit crept in gradually till the author of 
the Veda cried out: 'O Faith, endow us with belief,' and raised 
deeper questions in a hymn called the 'The Song of Creation', 
to which Max Miiller gave the title: 'To the Unknown God': 

1. Then there was not non-existent nor existent: there was no 

realm of air, no sky beyond it. 
What covered in, and where? and what gave shelter? was water 
there, unfathomed depth of water? 

2. Death was not then, nor was there aught immortal: no sign 

was there, the day's and night's divider. 
That one thing, breathless, breathed by its own nature: apart 
from it was nothing whatsoever. 

3. Darkness there was: at first concealed in darkness, this all was 

undiscriminated chaos. 
All that existed then was void and formless: by the great power 
of warmth was born that unit. 

4. Thereafter rose desire in the beginning, desire the primal seed 

and germ of spirit. 
Sages who searched with their heart's thought discovered the 
existent's kinship in the non-existent. 

5. Transversely was their severing line extended: what was above 

it then, and what below it? 
There were begetters, there were mighty forces, free action 
here and energy ofyonder. 

6. Who verily knows and who can here declare it, whence it was 

born and whence comes this creation? 
The gods are later than this world's production. 

Who knows, then, whence it first came into being. 

7. He, the first origin of this creation, whether he formed it all 

or did not form it. 
Whose eye controls this world in highest heaven, he verily 
knows it, or perhaps he knows it not. * 

The Acceptance and the Negation of Life 

From these dim beginnings of long ago flow out the rivers of 
Indian thought and philosophy, of Indian life and culture and 

*'Hindu Scriptures' Everyman's Library. Dent, London. 

80 



literature, ever widening and increasing in volume, and some- 
times flooding the land with their rich deposits. During this 
enormous span of years they changed their courses sometimes, 
and even appeared to shrivel up, yet they preserved their essen- 
tial identity. They could not have done so if they had not pos- 
sessed a sound instinct for life. That staying power need not 
necessarily be a virtue; it may well mean, as I think it has meant 
in India for a long time past, stagnation and decay. But it is a 
major fact to be reckoned with, especially in these days when 
we seem to be witnessing an undermining, in repeated wars and 
crises, of a proud and advanced civilization. Out of this crucible 
of war, wherein so much is melting, we hope that something 
finer will emerge for the west as well as the east, something that 
will retain all the great achievements of humanity and add to 
them what they lacked. But this repeated and widespread des- 
truction not only of material resources and human lives, but of 
essential values that have given meaning to life, is significant. 
Was it that in spite of astonishing progress in numerous direc- 
tions and the higher standards, undreamed of in previous ages, 
that came in its train, our modern highly industrialized civiliza- 
tion did not possess some essential ingredient, and that the seeds 
of self-destruction lay within it? 

A country under foreign domination seeks escape from the 
present in dreams of a vanished age, and finds consolation in 
visions of past greatness. That is a foolish and dangerous pas- 
time in which many of us indulge. An equally questionable 
practice for us in India is to imagine that we are still spiritually 
great though we have come down in the world in other respects. 
Spiritual or any other greatness cannot be founded on lack of 
freedom and opportunity, or on starvation and misery. Many 
western writers have encouraged the notion that Indians are 
other-worldly. I suppose the poor and unfortunate in every coun- 
try become to some extent other-worldly, unless they become 
revolutionaries, for this world is evidently not meant for them. 
So also subject peoples. 

As a man grows to maturity he is not entirely engrossed in, or 
satisfied with, the external objective world. He seeks also some 
inner meaning, some psychological and physical satisfactions. 
So also with peoples and civilizations as they mature and grow 
adult. Every civilization and ?very people exhibit these parallel 
streams of an external life and an internal life. Where they meet 
or keep close to each other, there is an equilibrium and stability. 
When they diverge conflict arises and the crises that torture the 
mind and spirit. 

We see from the period of the Rig Veda hymns onwards the 
development of both these streams of life and thought. The 

81 



early ones are full of the external world, of the beauty and 
mystery of nature, of joy in life and an overflowing vitality. The 
gods and goddesses, like those of Olympus, are very human; 
they are supposed to come down and mix with men and women; 
there is no hard and fast line dividing the two. Then thought 
comes and the spirit of inquiry and the mystery of a transcen- 
dental world deepens. Life still continues in abundant measure, 
but there is also a turning away from its outward manifestations 
and a spirit of detachment grows as the eyes are turned to things 
invisible, which cannot be seen or heard or felt in the ordinary 
way. What is the object of it all ? Is there a purpose in the uni- 
verse? And, if so, how can man's life be put in harmony with it? 
Can we bring about a harmonious relation between the visible 
and invisible worlds, and thus find out the right conduct of life? 

So we find in India, as elsewhere, these two streams of thought 
and action — the acceptance of life and the abstention from it — 
developing side by side, with the emphasis on the one or the other 
varying in different periods. Yet the basic background of that 
culture was not one of other-worldliness or world-worthlessness. 
Even when, in philosophical language, it discussed the world 
as maya, or what is popularly believed to be illusion, that very 
conception was not an absolute one but relative to what was 
thought of as ultimate reality (something like Plato's shadow of 
reality), and it took the world as it is and tried to live its life and 
enjoy its manifold beauty. Probably Semitic culture, as exempli- 
fied in many religions that emerged from it, and certainly early 
Christianity, was far more other-worldly. T. E. Lawrence says 
that 'the common base of all Semitic creeds, winners or losers, 
was the ever present idea of world-worthlessness.' And this often 
led to an alternation of self-indulgence and self-denial. 

In India we find during every period when her civilization 
bloomed an intense joy in life and nature, a pleasure in the act 
of living, the development of art and music and literature and 
song and dancing and painting and the theatre, and even a highly 
sophisticated inquiry into sex relations. It is inconceivable that 
a culture or view of life based on other-worldliness or world- 
worthlessness could have produced all these manifestations of 
vigorous and varied life. Indeed it should be obvious that any 
culture that was basically other-worldly could not have carried 
on for thousands of years. 

Yet some people have thought that Indian thought and cul- 
ture represent essentially the principle of life negation and hot 
of life affirmation. Both principles are, I suppose, present in 
varying degrees in all the old religions and cultures. But I should 
have thought that Indian culture, taken as a whole, never empha- 
sized the negation of life, though some of its philosophies did so; 

82 



it seems to have done so much less than Christianity. Buddhism 
and Jainism rather emphasized the abstention from life, and in 
certain periods of Indian history there was a running away from 
life on a big scale, as, for instance, when large numbers of people 
joined the Buddhist Viharas or monasteries. What the reason for 
this was I do not know. Equally, or more, significant instances 
can be found during the Middle Ages in Europe when a wide- 
spread belief existed that the world was coming to an end. Per- 
haps the ideas of renunciation and life-negation are caused or 
emphasized by a feeling of frustration due to political and econo- 
mic factors. 

Buddhism, in spite of its theoretical approach, or rather 
approaches, for there are several, as a matter of fact avoids ex- 
tremes; its is the doctrine of the golden mean, the middle path. Even 
the idea of Nirvana was very far from being a kind of nothingness, 
as it is sometimes supposed to be; it was a positive condition, but 
because it was beyond the range of human thought negative terms 
were used to describe it. If Buddhism, a typical product of Indian 
thought and culture, had merely been a doctrine of life negation 
or denial, it would surely have had some such effect on the hun- 
dreds of millions who profess it. Yet, as a matter of fact, the 
Buddhist countries are full of evidence to the contrary, and the 
Chinese people are an outstanding example of what affirmation 
of life can be. 

The confusion seems to have arisen from the fact that Indian 
theught was always laying stress on the ultimate purpose of life. 
It could never forget the transcendent element in its makeup; 
and so, while affirming life to the full, it refused to become a 
victim and a slave of life. Indulge in right action with all your 
strength and energy, it said, but keep above it, and do not worry 
much about the results of such action. Thus it taught detachment 
in life and action, not abstention from them. This idea of detach- 
ment runs through Indian thought and philosophy, as it does 
through most other philosophies. It is another way of saying that 
a right balance and equilibrium should be kept between the 
visible and invisible worlds, for if there is too much attachment 
to action in the visible world, the other world is forgotten and 
fades away, and action itself becomes without ultimate purpose. 

There is an emphasis on truth, a dependence on it, a passion 
for it, in these early adventures of the Indian mind. Dogma or 
revelation are passed by as something for lesser minds which 
cannot rise above them. The approach was one of experiment 
based on personal experience. That experience, when it dealt 
with the invisible world, was, like all emotional and psychic 
experiences, different from the experience of the visible, external 
world. It seemed to go out of the three-dimensional world we 

83 



know into some different and vaster realm, and was thus difficult 
to describe in terms of three dimensions. What that experience 
was, and whether it was a vision or realization of some aspects 
of truth and reality, or was merely a phantasm of the imagina- 
tion, I do not know. Probably it was often self-delusion. What 
interests me more is the approach, which was not authoritarian 
or dogmatic but was an attempt to discover for oneself what lay 
behind the external aspect of life. 

It must be remembered that the business of philosophy in India 
was not confined to a few philosophers or highbrows. Philosophy 
was an essential part of the religion of the masses; it percolated 
to them in some attenuated form and created that philosophic 
outlook which became nearly as common in India as it is in 
China. That philosophy was for some a deep and intricate attempt 
to know the causes and laws of all phenomena, the search for 
the ultimate purpose of life, and the attempt to find an organic 
unity in life's many contradictions. But for the many it was a 
much simpler affair, which yet gave them some sense of purpose, 
of cause and effect, and endowed them with courage to face trial 
and misfortune and not lose their gaiety and composure. The 
ancient wisdom of China and India, the Tao or the True Path, 
wrote Tagore to Dr. Tai Chit-tao, was the pursuit of complete- 
ness, the blending of life's diverse work with the joy of living. 
Something of that wisdom impressed itself even upon the illiterate 
and ignorant masses, and we have seen how the Chinese people, 
after seven years of horrible war, have not lost the anchor of their 
faith or the gaiety of their minds. In India our trial has been more 
drawn out, and poverty and uttermost misery have long been the 
inseparable companions of our people. And yet they still laugh 
and sing and dance and do not lose hope. 

Synthesis and Adjustment. The Beginnings of the 
Caste System 

The coming of the Aryans into India raised new problems — 
racial and political. The conquered race, the Dravidians, had 
a long background of civilization behind them, but there is little 
doubt that the Aryans considered themselves vastly superior 
and a wide gulf separated the two races. Then there were also 
the backward aboriginal tribes, nomads or forest-dwellers. 
Out of this conflict and interaction of races gradually arose the 
caste system, which, in the course of succeeding centuries, was 
to affect Indian life so profoundly. Probably caste was neither 
Aryan nor Dravidian. It was an attempt at the social organiza- 
tion of different races, a rationalization of the facts as they existed 
at the time. It brought degradation in its train afterwards, and 

84 



it is still a burden and a curse; but we can hardly judge it from 
subsequent standards or later developments. It was in keeping 
with the spirit of the times and some such grading took place in 
most of the ancient civilizations, though apparently China was 
free from it. There was a four-fold division in that other branch 
of the Aryans, the Iranians, during the Sassanian period, but it 
did not petrify into caste. Many of these old civilizations, includ- 
ing that of Greece, were entirely dependent on mass slavery. 
There was no such mass or large-scale labour slavery in India, 
although there were relatively small numbers of domestic slaves. 
Plato in his 'Republic' refers to a division similar to that of the 
four principal castes. Mediaeval Catholicism knew this division 
also. 

Caste began with a hard and fast division between Aryans 
and non-Aryans, the latter again being divided into the Dravi- 
dian races and the aboriginal tribes. The Aryans, to begin with, 
formed one class and there was hardly any specialization. The 
word Arya comes from a root word meaning to till, and the 
Aryans as a whole were agriculturists and agriculture was con- 
sidered a noble occupation. The tiller of the soil functioned 
also as priest, soldier, or trader, and there was no privileged order 
of priests. The caste divisions, originally intended to separate the 
Aryans from the non-Aryans, reacted on the Aryans themselves, 
and as division of functions and specialization increased, the 
new classes took the form of castes. 

Thus at a time when it was customary for the conquerors to 
exterminate or enslave the conquered races, caste enabled a 
more peaceful solution which fitted in with the growing speciali- 
zation of functions. Life was graded and out of the mass of agri- 
culturists evolved the Vaishyas, the agriculturists, artisans, and 
merchants; the Kshatriyas, or rulers and warriors; and the Brah- 
mins, priests and thinkers who were supposed to guide policy and 
preserve and maintain the ideals of the nation. Below these three 
were the Shudras or labourers and unskilled workers, other than 
the agriculturists. Among the indigenous tribes many were gradu- 
ally assimilated and given a place at the bottom of the social scale, 
that is among the Shudras. This process of assimilation was a 
continuous one. These castes must have been in a fluid condition; 
rigidity came in much later. Probably the ruling class had always 
great latitude, and any person who by conquest or otherwise 
assumed power, could, if he so willed, join the hierarchy as a 
Kshatriya, and get the priests to manufacture an appropriate 
genealogy connecting him with some ancient Aryan hero. 

The word Arya ceased to have any racial significance and came 
to mean 'noble', just as unarya meant ignoble and was usually 
applied to nomadic tribes, forest-dwellers, etc. 

85 



The Indian mind was extraordinarily* analytical and had a 
passion for putting ideas and concepts, and even life's activities, 
into compartments. The Aryans not only divided society into 
four main groups but also divided the individual's life into four 
parts: the first part consisted of growth and adolescence, the 
student period of life, acquiring knowledge, developing self- 
discipline and self-control, continence; the second was that of 
the householder and man of the world; the third was that of 
the elder statesman, who had attained a certain poise and ob- 
jectivity, and could devote himself to public work without the 
selfish desire to profit by it; and the last stage was that of the 
recluse, who lived a life largely cut off from the world's acti- 
vities. In this way also they adjusted the two opposing tendencies 
which often exist side by side in man — the acceptance of life in 
its fullness and the rejection of it. 

In India, as in China, learning and eruditions have always 
stood high in public esteem, for learning was supposed to imply 
both superior knowledge and virtue. Before the learned man 
the ruler and the warrior have always bowed. The old Indian 
theory was that those who were concerned with the exercise of 
power could not be completely objective. Their personal interests 
and inclinations would come into conflict with their public 
duties. Hence the task of determining values and the preserva- 
tion of ethical standards was allotted to a class or group of thin- 
kers who were freed from material cares and were, as far as 
possible, without obligations, so that they could consider life's 
problems in a spirit of detachment. This class of thinkers or 
philosophers was thus supposed to be at the top of the social 
structure, honoured and respected by all. The men of action, the 
rulers and warriors came after them and, however powerful they 
might be, did not command the same respect. The possession 
of wealth was still less entitled to honour and respect. The war- 
rior class, though not at the top, held a high position, and not as 
in China, where it was looked upon with contempt. 

This was the theory, and to some extent it may be found else- 
where, as in Christendom in mediaeval Europe, when the Roman 
Church assumed the functions of leadership in all spiritual, 
ethical, and moral matters, and even in the general principles 
underlying the conduct of the State. In practice Rome became 
intensely interested in temporal power, and the princes of the 
Church were rulers in their own right. In India the Brahmin 
class, in addition to supplying the thinkers and the philosophers, 
became a powerful and entrenched priesthood, intent on pre- 
serving its vested interests. Yet this theory in varying degrees has 
influenced Indian life profoundly, and the ideal has continued 
to be of a man full of learning and charity, essentially good, self- 

86 



disciplined, and capable of sacrificing himself for the sake of 
others. 

The Brahmin class has shown all the vices of a privileged and 
entrenched class in the past, and large numbers of them have 
possessed neither learning nor virtue. Yet they have largely 
retained the esteem of the public, not because of temporal power 
or possession of money, but because they have produced a remark- 
able succession of men of intelligence, and their record of public 
service and personal sacrifice for the public good has been a notable 
one. The whole class profited by the example of its leading perso- 
nalities in every age, and yet the public esteem went to the 
qualities rather than to any official status. The tradition was one 
of respecting learning and goodness in any individual who 
possessed them. There are innumerable examples of non-Brah- 
mins, and even persons belonging to the depressed classes, being 
so respected and sometimes considered as saints. Official status 
and military power never commanded the same measure of res- 
pect, though it may have been feared. 

Even to-day, in this money age, the influence of this tradition 
is marked, and because of it Gandhiji (who is not a Brahmin) 
can become the supreme leader of India and move the hearts 
of millions without force or compulsion or official position or 
possession-of money. Perhaps this is as good a test as any of a 
nation's cultural background and its conscious or subconscious 
objective: to what kind of a leader does it give its allegiance? 

The central idea of old Indian civilization, or Indo-Aryan 
culture, was that of dharma, which was something much more 
than religion or creed; it was a conception of obligations, of the 
discharge of one's duties to oneself and to others. This dharma 
itself was part of Rita, the fundamental moral law governing 
the functioning of the universe and all it contained. If there was 
such an order then man was supposed to fit into it, and he should 
function in such a way as to remain in harmony with it. If man 
did his duty and was ethically right in his action, the right 
consequences would inevitably follow. Rights as such were not 
emphasized. That, to some extent, was the old outlook every- 
where. It stands out in marked contrast, with the modern asser- 
tion of rights, rights of individuals, of groups, of nations. 

The Continuity of Indian Culture 

Thus in these very early days we find the beginnings of the 
civilization and culture which were to flower so abundantly and 
richly in subsequent ages, and which have continued, in spite 
of many changes, to our own day. The basic ideals, the govern- 
ing concepts are taking shape, and literature and philosophy, 

87 



art and drama, and all other activities of life were conditioned 
by these ideals and world-view. Also we see that exclusiveness 
and touch-me-notism which were to grow and grow till they 
became unalterable, octopus-like, with their grip on everything 
— the caste system of modern times. Fashioned for a particular 
day, intended to stabilize the then organization of society and 
give it strength and equilibrium, it developed into a prison for 
that social order and for the mind of man. Security was pur- 
chased in the long run at the cost of ultimate progress. 

Yet it was a very long run and, even within that framework, 
the vital original impetus for advancement in all directions was 
so great that it spread out all over India and over the eastern seas, 
and its stability was such that it survived repeated shock and 
invasion. 

Professor Macdonell, in his 'History of Sanskrit Literature,' 
tells us that 'the importance of Indian literature as a whole 
consists in its originality. When the Greeks towards the end of 
the fourth century B.C. invaded the north-west, the Indians had 
already worked out a national culture of their own, unaffected 
by foreign influences. And in spite of successive waves of invasion 
and conquest by Persians, Greeks, Scythians, Mohammedans, 
the national development of the life and literature of the Indo- 
Aryan race remained practically unchecked and unmodified from 
without down to the era of British occupation. No other branch 
of the Indo-European stock has experienced an isolated evolution 
like this. No other country except China can trace back its language 
and literature, its religious beliefs and rites, its dramatic and 
social customs through an uninterrupted development of more 
than 3,000 years.' 

Still India was not isolated, and throughout this long period 
of history she had continuous and living contacts with Iranians 
and Greeks, Chinese and Central Asians and others. If her basic 
culture survived these contacts there must have been something 
in that culture itself which gave it the dynamic strength to do 
so, some inner vitality and understanding of life. For this three 
or four thousand years of cultural growth and continuity is 
remarkable. Max Miiller, the famous scholar and Orientalist, 
emphasizes this: 'There is, in fact, an unbroken continuity 
between the most modern and the most ancient phases of Hindu 
thought, extending over more than three thousand years.' Carried 
away by his enthusiasm, he said (in his lectures delivered before 
the University of Cambridge, England, in 1882): 'If we were to 
look over the whole world to find out the country most 
richly endowed with all the wealth, power, and beauty that nature 
can bestow — in some parts a very paradise on earth — I should 
point to India. If I were asked under what sky the human mind 



has most fully developed some of its choicest gifts, has most deeply 
pondered over the greatest problems of life, and has found solu- 
tions of some of them which well deserve the attention even of 
those who have studied Plato and Kant — I should point to India. 
And if I were to ask myself from what literature we here in Europe, 
we who have been nurtured almost exclusively on the thoughts 
of Greeks and Romans, and of one Semitic race, the Jewish, may 
draw the corrective which is most wanted in order to make our 
inner life more perfect, more comprehensive, more universal, in 
fact more truly human a life, not for this life only, but a trans- 
figured and eternal life — again I should point to India.' 

Nearly half a century later Romain Rolland wrote in the same 
strain: 'If there is one place on the face of the earth where all 
the dreams of living men have found a home from the very 
earliest days when man began the dream of existence, it is India.' 

The Upanishads 

The Upanishads, dating from about 800 B.C., take us a step 
further in the development of Indo-Aryan thought, and it is a 
big step. The Aryans have long been settled down and a stable, 
prosperous civilization has grown up, a mixture of the old and 
the new, dominated by Aryan thought and ideals, but with a 
background of more primitive forms of worship, l'he Vedas are 
referred to with respect, but also in a spirit of gentle irony. The 
Vedic gods no longer satisfy and the ritual of the priests is made 
fun of. But there is no attempt to break with the past; the past 
is taken as a starting point for further progress. 

The Upanishads are instinct with a spirit of inquiry, of mental 
adventure, of a passion for finding out the truth about things. 
The search for this truth is, of course, not by the objective methods 
of modern science, yet there is an element of the scientific method 
in the approach. No dogma is allowed to come in the way. There 
is much that is trivial and without any meaning or relevance for 
us to-day. The emphasis is essentially on self-realization, on know- 
ledge of the individual self and the absolute self, both of which are 
said to be the same in essence. The objective external world is 
not considered unreal but real in a relative sense, an aspect of the 
inner reality. 

There are many ambiguities in the Upanishads and different 
interpretations have been made. But that is a matter for the 
philosopher or scholar. The general tendency is towards monism 
and the whole approach is evidently intended to lessen the diffe- 
rences that must have existed then, leading to fierce debate. It 
is the way of synthesis. Interest in magic and such like super- 
natural knowledge is sternly discouraged, and ritual and cere- 

89 



monies without enlightenment are said to be in vain — 'those 
engaged in them, considering themselves men of understanding 
and learned, stagger along aimlessly like blind men led by the 
blind, and fail to reach the goal.' Even the Vedas are treated as 
the lower knowledge; the higher one being that of the inner mind. 
There is a warning given against philosophical learning without 
discipline of conduct. And there is a continuous attempt to 
harmonize social activity with spiritual adventure. The duties 
and obligations imposed by life were to be carried out, but in 
a spirit of detachment. 

Probably the ethic of individual perfection was over-emphasiz- 
ed and hence the social outlook suffered. 'There is nothing higher 
than the person,' say the Upanishads. Society must have been 
considered as stabilized and hence the mind of man was conti- 
nually thinking of individual perfection, and in quest of this it 
wandered about in the heavens and in the innermost recesses of 
the heart. This old Indian approach was not a narrow national- 
istic one, though there must have been a feeling that India was 
the hub of the world, just as China and Greece and Rome have 
felt at various times. 'The whole world of mortals is an inter- 
dependent organism,' says the Mahabharata. 

The metaphysical aspects of the questions considered in the 
Upanishads are difficult for me to grasp, but I am impressed by 
this approach to a problem which has so often been shrouded 
by dogma and blind belief. It was the philosophical approach 
and not the religious one. I like the vigour of the thought, the 
questioning, the rationalistic background. The form is terse, 
often of question and answer between pupil and teacher, and 
it has been suggested that the Upanishads were some kind of 
lecture notes made by the teacher or taken down by his disciples. 
Professor F. W. Thomas in 'The Legacy of India' says: 'What 
gives to the Upanishads their unique quality and unfailing human 
appeal is an earnest sincerity of tone, as of friends conferring 
upon matters of deep concern.' And C. Rajagopalachart thus 
eloquently speaks of them: 'The spacious imagination, the 
majestic sweep of thought, and the almost reckless spirit of ex- 
ploration with which, urged by the compelling thirst for truth, 
the Upanishad teachers and pupils dig into the "open secret" of 
the universe, make this most ancient of the world's holy books 
still the most modern and most satisfying.' 

The dominating characteristic of the Upanishads is the depen- 
dence on truth. 'Truth wins ever, not falsehood. With truth is 
paved the road to the Divine.' And the famous invocation is for 
light and understanding: 'Lead me from the unreal to the real! 
Lead me from darkness to light! Lead me from death to immor- 
tality.' 

90 



Again and again the restless mind peeps out, ever seeking, ever 
questioning: 'At whose behest doth mind light on its perch? At 
whose command doth life, the first, proceed? At whose behest 
do men send forth this speech? What god, indeed, directed eye 
and ear?' And again: 'Why cannot the wind remain still? Why 
has the human mind no rest? Why, and in search of what, does 
the water run out and cannot stop its flow even for a moment?' 
It is the adventure of man that is continually calling and there 
is no resting on the way and no end of the journey. In the Aitereya 
Brahmana there is a hymn about this long endless journey which 
we must undertake, and every verse ends with the refrain: Charaiveti, 
charaiveti — 'Hence, O traveller, march along, march along!' 

There is no humility about all this quest, the humility before 
an all-powerful deity, so often associated with religion. It is the 
triumph ofmind over the environment. 'My body will be reduced 
to ashes and my breath will join the restless and deathless air, 
but not I and my deeds. O mind, remember this always, remem- 
ber this.' In a morning prayer the sun is addressed thus: 'O sun 
ofrefulgent glory, I am the same person as makes thee what thou 
art!' What superb confidence! 

What is the soul? It cannot be described or defined except 
negatively: 'It is not this, not this.' Or, in a way, positively: 
'That thou art!' The individual soul is like a spark thrown out 
and reabsorbed by the blazing fire of the absolute soul. As fire, 
though one, entering the world, takes a separate form according 
to whatever it burns, so does the inner Self within all things 
become different, according to whatever it enters, yet itself is 
without form.' This realization that all things have that same 
essence removes the barriers which separate us from them and 
produces a sense of unity with humanity and nature, a unity 
which underlies the diversity and manifoldness of the external 
world. 'Who knoweth all things are Self; for him what grief 
existeth, what delusion, when (once) he gazeth on the oneness?' 
'Aye, whoso seeth all things in that Self, and Self in everything; 
from That he'll no more hide.' 

It is interesting to compare and contrast the intense indivi- 
dualism and exclusiveness of the Indo-Aryans with this all- 
embracing approach, which overrides all barriers of caste and 
class and every other external and internal difference. This latter 
is a kind of metaphysical democracy. 'He who sees the one spirit 
in all, and all in the one spirit, henceforth can look with con- 
tempt on no creature.' Though this was theory only, there can 
be no doubt that it must have affected life and produced that 
atmosphere of tolerance and reasonableness, that acceptance of 
free-thought in matters of faith, that desire and capacity to live 
and let live, which are dominant features of Indian culture, as 

91 



they are of the Chinese. There was no totalitarianism in religion 
or culture, and they indicate an old and wise civilization with 
inexhaustible mental reserves. 

There is a question in the Upanishads to which a very curious 
and yet significant answer is given. 'The question is: "What is 
this universe? From what does it arise? Into what does it go?" 
And the answer is: "In freedom it rises, in freedom it rests, and 
into freedom it melts away." ' What exactly this means I am 
unable to understand, except that the authors of the Upanishads 
were passionately attached to the idea of freedom and wanted 
to see everything in terms of it. Swami Vivekananda was always 
emphasizing this aspect. 

It is not easy for us, even imaginatively, to transplant our- 
selves to this distant period and enter the mental climate of that 
day. The form of writing itself is something that we are unused 
to, odd looking, difficult to translate, and the background of life 
is utterly different. We take for granted so many things to-day 
because we are used to them, although they are curious and un- 
reasonable enough. But what we are not used to at all is much 
more difficult to appreciate or understand. In spite of all these 
difficulties and almost insuperable barriers, the message of the 
Upanishads has found willing and eager listeners throughout 
Indian history and has powerfully moulded the national mind 
and character. 'There is no important form of Hindu thought, 
heterodox Buddhism included, which is not rooted in the Upa- 
nishads,' says Bloomfield. 

Early Indian thought penetrated to Greece, through Iran, and 
influenced some thinkers and philosophers there. Much later, 
Plotinus came to the east to study Iranian and Indian philo- 
sophy and was especially influenced by the mystic element in the 
Upanishads. From Plotinus many of these ideas are said to have 
gone to St. Augustine, and through him influenced the Chris- 
tianity of the day.* 

The rediscovery by Europe, during the past century and a half, 
of Indian philosophy created a powerful impression on European 
philosophers and thinkers. Schopenhauer, the pessimist, is often 
quoted in this connection. 'From every sentence (of the Upa- 
nishads) deep, original and sublime thoughts arise, and the whole 

is pervaded by a high and holy and earnest spirit In the 

whole world there is no study... so beneficial and so elevating 

as that of the Upanishads (They) are products of the highest 

wisdom It is destined sooner or later to become the faith 

*Romain Holland has given a long Note (as an appendix to his book on Vivekananda), 
'On the Hellenic-Christian Mysticism of the First Centuries and its Relationship to Hindu 
Mysticism. ' He points out that 'a hundred facts testify to how great an extent the East was 
mingled with Hellenic thought during the second century of our era. ' 

92 



of the people.' And again: 'The study of the Upanishads has 
been the solace of my life, it will be the solace of my death.' 
Writing on this, Max Muller says: 'Schopenhauer was the last 
man to write at random, or to allow himself to go into ecstasies 
over so-called mystic and inarticulate thought. And I am neither 
afraid nor ashamed to say that I share his enthusiasm for the 
Vedanta, and feel indebted to it for much that has been helpful 
to me in my passage through life.' In another place Max Muller 
says: 'The Upanishads are the ...sources of. ..the Vedanta 
philosophy, a system in which human speculation seems to me 
to have reached its very acme.' T spend my happiest hours in 
reading Vedantic books. They are to me like the light of the 
morning, like the pure air of the mountains — so simple, so true, 
if once understood.' 

But perhaps the most eloquent tribute to the Upanishads and 
to the later book, the Bhagavad Gita, was paid by A.E. (G. W. 
Russell) the Irish poet: 'Goethe, Wordsworth, Emerson and 
Thoreau among moderns have something of this vitality and 
wisdom, but we can find all they have said and much more in 
the grand sacred books of the East. The Bhagavad Gita and the 
Upanishads contain such godlike fullness of wisdom on all things 
that I feel the authors must have looked with calm rememb- 
rance back through a thousand passionate lives, full of feverish 
strife for and with shadows, ere they could have written with 
such certainty of things which the soul feels to be sure.'* 

The Advantages and Disadvantages of an Individualistic 

Philosophy 

There is, in the Upanishads, a continual emphasis on the fitness 
of the body and clarity of the mind, on the discipline of both 
body and mind, before effective progress can be made. The 
acquisition of knowledge, or any achievement, requires restraint, 
self-suffering, self-sacrifice. This idea of some kind of penance, 
tapasya, is inherent in Indian thought, both among the thinkers 
at the top and the unread masses below. It is present to-day as 
it was present some thousands of years ago, and it is necessary 
to appreciate it in order to understand the psychology under- 
lying the mass movements which have convulsed India under 
Gandhiji's leadership. 

*There is an odd and interesting passage in one of the Upanishads (the Chhandogya): 
'The sun never sets nor rises. When people think to themselves the sun is setting lie only 
changes about after reaching the end of the day, and makes night below and day to what is 
on the other side. Then when people think he rises in the morning, he only shifts himself 
about after reaching the end of the night, and makes day below and night to what is on the 
other side. In fact he never does set at all. ' 

93 



It is obvious that the ideas of the authors of the Upanishads, 
the rarefied mental atmosphere in which they moved, were con- 
fined to a small body of the elect who were capable of under- 
standing them. They were entirely beyond the comprehension of 
the vast mass of the people. A creative minority is always small 
in numbers but, if it is in tune with the majority, and is always 
trying to pull the latter up and make it advance, so that the 
gap between the two is lessened, a stable and progressive culture 
results. Without that creative minority a civilization must inevit- 
ably decay. But it may also decay if the bond between a creative 
minority and the majority is broken and there is a loss of social 
unity in society as a whole, and ultimately that minority itself 
loses its creativeness and becomes barren and sterile; or else it 
gives place to another creative or vital force which society throws 

It is difficult for me, as for most others, to visualize the period 
of the Upanishads and to analyse the various forces that were 
at play. I imagine, however, that in spite of the vast mental and 
cultural difference between the small thinking minority and the 
unthinking masses, there was a bond between them or, at any 
rate, there was no obvious gulf. The graded society in which 
they lived had its mental gradation also and these were accepted 
and provided for. This led to some kind of social harmony and 
conflicts were avoided. Even the new thought of the Upanishads 
was interpreted for popular purposes so as to fit in with popular 
prejudices and superstitions, thereby losing much of its essential 
meaning. The graded social structure was not touched; it was 
preserved. The conception of monism became transformed into 
one of monotheism for religious purposes, and even lower forms 
of belief and worship were not only tolerated but encouraged, 
as suited to a particular stage of development. 

Thus the ideology of the Upanishads did not permeate to any 
marked extent to the masses and the intellectual separation 
between the creative minority and the majority became more 
marked. In course of time this led to new movements — a power- 
ful wave of materialistic philosophy, agnosticism, atheism. Out 
of this again grew Buddhism and Jainism, and the famous Sans- 
krit epics, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, wherein yet 
another attempt was made to bring about a synthesis between 
rival creeds and ways of thought. The creative energy of the 
people, or of the creative minority, is very evident during these 
periods, and again there appears to be a bond between that 
minority and the majority. On the whole they pull together. 

In this way period succeeds period with bursts of creative effort 
in the fields of thought and action, in literature and the drama, 
in sculpture and architecture, and in cultural, missionary and 

94 



colonial enterprises far from India's borders. In between, there 
are periods of disharmony and conflict, due both to inner causes 
and intrusions from outside. Yet they are ultimately overcome 
and a fresh period of creative energy supervenes. The last great 
period of such activity in a variety of directions was the classical 
epoch which began in the fourth century after Christ. By about 
1000 A.C., or earlier, signs of inner decay in India are very evi- 
dent, although the old artistic impulse continued to function 
and produce fine work. The coming of new races with a different 
background brought a new driving foi;ce to India's tired mind 
and spirit, and out of that impact arose new problems and new 
attempts at solution. 

It seems that the intense individualism of the Indo-Aryans 
led, in the long run, to both the good and the evil that their 
culture produced. It led to the production of very superior types, 
not in one particular limited period of history, but again and 
again, age after age. It gave a certain idealist and ethical back- 
ground to the whole culturfe, which persisted and still persists, 
though it may not influence practice much. With the help of 
this background and by sheer force of example at the top, they 
help together the social fabric and repeatedly rehabilitated it 
when it threatened to go to pieces. They produced an astonish- 
ing flowering of civilization and culture which, though largely 
confined to the upper circles, inevitably spread to some extent 
to the masses. By their extreme tolerance of other beliefs and 
other ways than their own, they avoided the conflicts that have 
so often torn society asunder, and managed to maintain, as a 
rule, some kind of equilibrium. By allowing, within the larger 
framework, considerable freedom to people to live the life of 
their choice, they showed the wisdom of an old and experienced 
race. All these were very remarkable achievements. 

But that very individualism led them to attach little import- 
ance to the social aspect of man, of man's duty to society. For 
each person life was divided and fixed up, a bundle of duties 
and responsibilities within his narrow sphere in the graded 
hierarchy. He had no duty to, or conception of, society as a 
whole, and no attempt was made to make him feel his solidarity 
with it. This idea is perhaps largely a modern development and 
cannot be found in any ancient society. It is unreasonable, there- 
fore, to expect it in ancient India. Still, the emphasis on indivi- 
dualism, on exclusiveness, on graded castes is much more evident 
in India. In later ages it was to grow into a very prison for the 
mind of our people — not only for the lower castes, who suffered 
most from it, but for the higher ones also. Throughout our 
history it was a weakening factor, and one might perhaps say 
that along with the growth of rigidity in the caste system, grew 



rigidity of mind and the creative energy of the race faded away. 

Another curious fact seems to stand out. The extreme toler- 
ance of every kind of belief and practice, every superstition and 
folly, had its injurious side also, for this perpetuated many an 
evil custom and prevented people from getting rid of the tradi- 
tional burdens that prevented growth. The growing priesthood 
exploited this situation to their own advantage and built up 
their powerful vested interests on the foundation of the super- 
stitions of the masses. That priesthood was probably never quite 
so powerful as in some branches of the Christian Church, for 
there were always spiritual leaders who condemned its practices, 
and there was a variety of beliefs to choose from, but it was strong 
enough to hold and exploit the masses. 

So this mixture of free thought and orthodoxy lived side by 
side, and out of them scholasticism grew, and a puritanical ritua- 
lism. The appeal was always made to the ancient authorities, 
but little attempt was made to interpret their truths in terms of 
changing conditions. The creative and spiritual forces weakened, 
and only the shell of what used to be so full of life and meaning 
remained. 

Aurobindo Ghose has written: 'If an ancient Indian of the 
time of the Upanishad, of the Buddha, or the later classical age 
were to be set down in modern India... he would see his race 
clinging to forms and shells and rags of the past and missing nine- 
tenths of its nobler meaning., .he would be amazed by the extent 
of the mental poverty, the immobility, the static repetition, the 
cessation of science, the long sterility of art, the comparative 
feebleness of the creative intuition.' 

Materialism 

One of our major misfortunes is that we have lost so much of 
the world's ancient literature — in Greece, in India, and else- 
where. Probably this was inevitable as these books were origi- 
nally written on plam-leaves or on bhurjapatra, the thin layers 
of the bark of the birch tree which peel off' so easily, and later 
on paper. There were only a few copies of a work in existence 
and if they were lost or destroyed, that work disappeared, and 
it can only be traced by references to it, or quotations from it, 
in other books. Even so, about fifty or sixty thousand manus- 
cripts in Sanskrit or its variations have already been traced and 
listed and fresh discoveries are being constantly made. Many old 
Indian books have so far not been found in India at all but 
their translations in Chinese or Tibetan have been discovered. 
Probably an organized search for old manuscripts in the libraries 
of religious institutions, monasteries and private persons would 



yield rich results. That, and the critical examination of these 
manuscripts and, where considered desirable, their publication 
and translation, are among the many things we have to do in 
India when we succeed in breaking through our shackles and 
can function for ourselves. Such study is bound to throw light 
on many phases of Indian history and especially on the social 
background behind historic events and changing ideas. The fact 
that in spite of repeated losses and destruction, and without any 
organized attempt to discover them, over fifty thousand manus- 
cripts have been brought out, shows how extra-ordinarily abun- 
dant must have been the literary, dramatic, philosophical and 
other productions of old times. Many of the manuscripts dis- 
covered still await thorough examination. 

Among the books that have been lost is the entire literature 
on materialism which followed the period of the early Upani- 
shads. The only references to this, now found, are in criticisms 
of it and in elaborate attempts to disprove the materialist theories. 
There can be no doubt, however, that the materialist philosophy 
was professed in India for centuries and had, at the time, a powerful 
influence on the people. In the famous Arthashastra, Kautilya's 
book on political and economic organization, written in the fourth 
century B.C., it is mentioned as one of the major philosophies of 
India. 

We have then to rely on the critics and persons interested in 
disparaging this philosophy, and they try to pour ridicule on it 
and show how absurd it all is. That is an unfortunate way for 
us to find out what it was. Yet their very eagerness to discredit 
it shows how important it was in their eyes. Possibly much of 
the literature of materialism in India was destroyed by the priests and 
other believers in the orthodox religion during subsequent periods. 

The materialists attacked authority and all vested interests in 
thought, religion and theology. They denounced the Vedas and 
priestcraft and traditional beliefs, and proclaimed that belief 
must be free and must not depend on pre-suppositions or merely 
on the authority of the past. They inveighed against all forms 
of magic and superstition. Their general spirit was comparable 
in many ways to the modern materialistic approach; it wanted 
to rid itself of the chains and burden of the past, of speculation 
about matters which could not be perceived, of worship of 
imaginary gods. Only that could be presumed to exist which 
could be directly perceived, every other inference or presump- 
tion was equally likely to be true or false. Hence matter in its 
various forms and this world could only be considered as really 
existing. There was no other world, no heaven or hell, no soul 
separate from the body. Mind and intelligence and everything 
else have developed from the basic elements. Natural phenomena 



did not concern themselves with human values and were indiffer- 
ent to what we consider good or bad. Moral rules were mere 
conventions made by men. 

We recognize all this; it seems curiously of our day and not of 
more than two thousand years ago. How did these thoughts arise, 
these doubts and conflicts, this rebellion of the mind of man 
against traditional authority? We do not know enough of social 
and political conditions then, but it seems clear that it was an 
age of political conflict and social turmoil, leading to a disinte- 
gration of faith and to keen intellectual inquiry and a search 
for some way out, satisfying to the mind. It was out of this mental 
turmoil and social maladjustment that new paths grew and new 
systems of philosophy took shape. Systematic philosophy, not 
the intuitional approach of the Upanishads, but based on close 
reasoning and argument, begins to appear in many garbs, Jain, 
Buddhist, and what might be called Hindu, for want of a better 
word. The Epics also belong to this period and the Bhagavad Gita. 
It is difficult to build up an accurate chronology of this age, as 
thought and theory overlapped and acted and reacted on each 
other. Buddha came in the sixth century B.C. Some of these 
developments preceded him, others followed, or often there was 
a parallel growth. 

About the time of the rise of Buddhism, the Persian Empire 
reached the Indus. This approach of a great Power right to the 
borders of India proper must have influenced people's thoughts. 
In the fourth century B.C. Alexander's brief raid into north-west 
India took place. It was unimportant in itself, but it was the 
precursor of far-reaching changes in India. Almost immediately 
after Alexander's death, Chandragupta built up the great Maurya 
Empire. That was, historically speaking, the first strong, wide- 
spread and centralized state in India. Tradition mentions many 
such rulers and overlords of India and one of the epics deals with 
the struggle for the suzerainty of India, meaning thereby probably 
northern India. But, in all probability, ancient India, like ancient 
Greece, was a collection of small states. There were many tribal 
republics, some of them covering large areas; there were also 
petty kingdoms; and there were, as in Greece, city states with 
powerful guilds of merchants. In Buddha's time there were a 
number of these tribal republics and four principal kingdoms in 
Central and Northern India (including Gandhara or part of 
Afghanistan). Whatever the form of organization, the tradition 
of city or village autonomy was very strong, and even when an 
overlordship was acknowledged there was no interference with 
the internal working of the state. There was a kind of primitive 
democracy, though, as in Greece, it was probably confined to 
the upper classes. 



Ancient India and Greece, so different in many ways, have so 
much in common that I am led to believe that their background 
of life was very similar. The Peloponnesian war, ending in the 
breakdown of Athenian democracy might in some ways be com- 
pared to the Mahabharata war,* the great war of ancient India. 
The failure of Hellenism and of the free city state led to a feel- 
ing of doubt and despair, to a pursuit of mysteries and revela- 
tions, a lowering of the earlier ideals of the race. The emphasis 
shifted from this world to the next. Later, new schools of philo- 
sophy — the Stoic and the Epicurean — developed. 

It is dangerous and misleading to make historical comparisons 
on slender, and sometimes contradictory, data. Yet one is tempt- 
ed to do so. The period in India after the Mahabharata war, 
with its seemingly chaotic mental atmosphere, reminds one of 
the post-Hellenic period of Greece. There was a vulgarization 
of ideals and then a groping for new philosophies. Politically 
and economically similar internal changes might have been 
taking place, such as the weakening of the tribal republic and 
city state and the tendency to centralize state power. 

But this comparison does not take us very far. Greece never 
really recovered from these shocks, although Greek civilization 
flourished for some additional centuries in the Mediterranean 
and influenced Rome and Europe. In India there was a remark- 
able recovery and the thousand years from the Epic Period and 
the Buddha onwards were full of creative energy. Innumerable 
great names in philosophy, literature, drama, mathematics, and 
the arts stand out. In the early centuries of the Christian era a 
remarkable burst of energy resulted in the organization of colo- 
nial enterprises which took the Indian people and their culture 
to distant islands in the eastern seas. 

The Epics. History, Tradition, and Myth 

The two great epics of ancient India — the Ramayana and the 
Mahabharata — probably took shape in the course of several 
hundred years, and even subsequently additions were made to 
them. They deal with the early days of the Indo-Aryans, their 
conquests and civil wars, when they were expanding and con- 
solidating themselves, but they were composed and compiled 
later. I do not know of any books anywhere which have exercis- 
ed such a continuous and pervasive influence on the mass mind 
as these two. Dating back to a remote antiquity, they are still a 
living force in the life of the Indian people. Not in the original 

* The epic dealing with this war is also called Mahabharata. 

99 



Sanskrit, except for a few intellectuals, but in translations and 
adaptations, and in those innumerable ways in which tradition 
and legend spread and become a part of the texture of a people's 
life. They represent the typical Indian method of catering all 
together for various degrees of cultural development, from the 
highest intellectual to the simple unread and untaught villager. 
They make us understand somewhat the secret of the old Indians 
in holding together a variegated society divided up in many 
ways and graded in castes, in harmonizing their discords, and 
giving them a common background of heroic tradition and ethical 
living. Deliberately they tried to build up a unity of outlook 
among the people, which was to survive and overshadow all 
diversity. 

Among the earliest memories of my childhood are the stories 
from these epics told to me by my mother or the older ladies of 
the house, just as a child in Europe or America might listen to 
fairy tales or stories of adventure. There was for me both adven- 
ture and the fairy element in them. And then I used to be taken 
every year to the popular open-air performances where the 
Ramayana story was enacted and vast crowds came to see it and 
join in the processions. It was all very crude, but that did not 
matter, for everyone knew the story by heart and it was carnival 
time. 

In this way Indian mythology and old tradition crept into 
my mind and got mixed up with all manner of other creatures 
of the imagination. I do not think I ever attached very much 
importance to these stories as factually true, and I even criti- 
cized the magical and supernatural element in them. But they 
were just as imaginatively true for me as were the stories from 
the Arabian Nights or the Panchatantra, that storehouse of animal 
tales from which Western Asia and Europe have drawn so much.* 
As I grew up other pictures crowded into my mind: fairy stories, 
both Indian and European, tales from Greek mythology, the 
story of Joan of Arc, Alice in Wonderland, and many stories of 
Akbar and Birbal, Sherlock Holmes, King Arthur and his Knights, 

* The story of the innumerable translations and adaptations of the 'Panchatantra' into 
Asiatic and European languages is a long, intricate, and fascinating one. The first known 
translation was from Sanskrit into Pahlavi in the middle of the sixth century A.C. at the 
instance of Khusrau Anushirwan, Emperor of Persia. Soon after (c. 570 A.C.) a Syrian 
translation appeared, and later on an Arabic one. In the eleventh century new translations 
appeared in Syrian, Arabic, and Persian, the last named becoming famous as the story of 
'Kalia Daman.' It was through these translations that the 'Panchatantra' readied Europe. 
There was a Greek translation from the Syrian at the end of the eleventh century, and a 
little later a Hebrew translation. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries a number of transla- 
tions and adaptations appeared in Latin, Italian, Spanish, German, Swedish, Danish, Dutch 
Icelandic, French, English, Hungarian, Turkish, and a number of Slav languages. Thus 
the stories of the 'Panchatantra' merged into Asiatic and European literatures. 

100 



the Rani ofJhansi, the young heroine of the Indian Mutiny, and 
tales of Rajput chivalry and heroism. These and many others 
filled my mind in strange confusion, but always there was the 
background of Indian mythology which I had imbibed in my 
earliest years. 

If it was so with me, in spite of the diverse influences that 
worked on my mind, I realized how much more must old my- 
thology and tradition work on the minds of others and, especially, 
the unread masses of our people. That influence is a good influence 
both culturally and ethically, and I would hate to destroy or 
throw away all the beauty and imaginative symbolism that these 
stories and allegories contain. 

Indian mythology is not confined to the epics; it goes back 
to the Vedic period and appears in many forms and garbs in 
Sanskrit literature. The poets and the dramatists take full 
advantage of it and build their stories and lovely fancies round 
it. The Ashoka tree is said to burst into flower when touched 
by the foot of a beautiful woman. We read of the adventures 
of Kama, the god of love, and his wife, Rati (or rapture), with 
their friend Vasanta, the god of spring. Greatly daring, Kama 
shoots his flowery arrow at Shiva himself and is reduced to ashes 
by the fire that flashed out of Shiva's third eye. But he survives as 
Ananga, the bodiless one. 

Most of the myths and stories are heroic in conception and 
teach adherence to truth and the pledged word, whatever the 
consequences, faithfulness unto death and even beyond, cour- 
age, good works and sacrifice for the common good. Sometimes 
the story is pure rpyth, or else it is a mixture of fact and myth, 
an exaggerated account of some incident that tradition pre- 
served. Facts and fiction are so interwoven together as to be 
inseparable, and this amalgam becomes an imagined history, 
which may not tell us exactly what happened but does tell us 
something that is equally important — what people believed had 
taken place, what they thought their heroic ancestors were capable 
of, and what ideals inspired them. So, whether fact or fiction, 
it became a living element in their lives, ever pulling them up 
from the drudgery and ugliness of their everyday existence to higher 
realms, ever pointing towards the path of endeavour and right 
living, even though the ideal might be far off and difficult to reach. 

Goethe is reported to have condemned those who said that 
the old Roman stories of heroism, of Lucretia and others, were 
spurious and false. Anything, he said, that was essentially false 
and spurious could only be absurd and unfruitful and never 
beautiful and inspiring, and that 'if the Romans were great enough 
to invent things like that, we at least should be great enough to 
believe them.' 



Thus this imagined history, mixture of fact and fiction, or 
sometimes only fiction, becomes symbolically true and tells us of 
the minds and hearts and purposes of the people of that parti- 
cular epoch. It is true also in the sense that it becomes the basis 
for thought and action, for future history. The whole concep- 
tion of history in ancient India was influenced by the specula- 
tive and ethical trends of philosophy and religion. Little im- 
portance was attached to the writing of a chronicle or the compi- 
lation of a bare record of events. What those people were more 
concerned with was the effect and influence of human events and 
actions on human conduct. Like the Greeks, they were strongly 
imaginative and artistic and they gave rein to this artistry and 
imagination in dealing with past events, intent as they were on 
drawing some moral and lesson from them for future behaviour. 

Unlike the Greeks, and unlike the Chinese and the Arabs, 
Indians in the past were not historians. This was very unfortu- 
nate and it has made it difficult for us now to fix dates or make 
up an accurate chronology. Events run into each other, overlap 
and produce an enormous confusion. Only very gradually are 
patient scholars to-day discovering the clues to the maze of 
Indian history. There is really only one old book, Kalhana's 
'Rajatarangini', a history of Kashmir written in the twelfth cen- 
tury A.C., which may be considered as history. For the rest we 
have to go to the imagined history of the epics and other books, 
to some contemporary records, to inscriptions, to artistic and 
architectural remains, to coins, and to the large body of Sanskrit 
literature, for occasional hints; also, of course, to the many re- 
cords of foreign travellers who came to India, notably Greeks 
and Chinese, and, during a later period, Arabs. 

This lack of historical sense did not affect the masses, for as 
elsewhere and more so than elsewhere, they built up their view 
of the past from the traditional accounts and myth and story 
that were handed to them from generation to generation. This 
imagined history and mixture of fact and legend became widely 
known and gave to the people a strong and abiding cultural 
background. But the ignoring of history had evil consequences 
which we pursue still. It produced a vagueness of outlook, 
divorce from life as it is, a credulity, a woolliness of the mind 
where fact was concerned. That mind was not at all woolly in 
the far more difficult, but inevitably vaguer and more indefinite, 
realms of philosophy; it was both analytic and synthetic, often 
very critical, sometimes sceptical. But where fact was concerned,, 
it was uncritical, because, perhaps, it did not attach much im- 
portance to fact as such. 

The impact of science and the modern world have brought a 
greater appreciation of facts, a more critical faculty, a weighing 

102 



of evidence, a refusal to accept tradition merely because it is 
tradition. Many competent historians are at work now, but they 
often err on the other side and their work is more a meticulous 
chronicle of facts than living history. But even to-day it is 
strange how we suddenly become overwhelmed by tradition, 
and the critical faculties of even intelligent men cease to function. 
This may partly be due to the nationalism that consumes us 
in our present subject state. Only when we are politically and 
economically free will the mind function normally and critically. 

Very recently there has been a significant and revealing' inst- 
ance ofthis conflict between the critical outlook and nationalist 
tradition. In the greater part of India the Vikram Samvat calen- 
dar is observed; this is based on a solar reckoning, but the months 
are lunar. Last month, in April, 1944, according to this calendar, 
2,000 years were completed and a new millennium began. This 
has been the occasion for celebrations throughout India, and 
the celebrations were justified, both because it was a big turning 
point in the reckoning of time and because Vikram, or VikramS- 
ditya, with whose name the calendar is associated, has long been 
a great hero in popular tradition. Innumerable stories cling to 
his name, and many of these found their way in mediaeval times 
in different garbs to various parts of Asia, and later to Europe. 

Vikram has long been considered a national hero, a beau ideal 
of a prince. He is remembered as a ruler who pushed out fore- 
ign invaders. But his fame rests on the literary and cultural 
brilliance of his court, where he collected some of the most 
famous writers, artists, and musicians — the 'nine gems' of his 
court as they are called. Most of the stories deal with his desire 
to do good to his people, and to sacrifice himself or his personal 
interest at the slightest provocation in order to benefit someone 
else. He is famous for his generosity, service for others, courage, 
and lack of conceit. Essentially he has been popular because he 
was considered a good man and a patron of the arts. The fact 
that he was a successful soldier or a conqueror hardly comes 
out in the stories. That emphasis on the goodness and self-sacri- 
ficing nature of the man is characteristic of the Indian mind 
and of Indian ideals. Vikramaditya's name, like that of Caesar, 
became a kind of symbol and title, and numerous subsequent 
rulers added it to their names. This has added to the Confusion, 
as there are many Vikramadityas mentioned in history. 

But who was this Vikram? And when did he exist? Histori- 
cally speaking everything is vague. There is no trace of any such 
ruler round about 57 B.C. when the Vikram Samvat era should 
begin. There was, however, a Vikramaditya in North India in 
the fourth century A.C., and he fought against Hun invaders and 
pushed them out. It is he who is supposed to have kept the 'nine 

103 



gems' in his court and around whom all these stories gather. 
The problem then is this: How is this Vikramaditya who existed 
in the fourth century A.C. to be connected with an era which begins 
in 57 B.C. ? The probable explanation appears to be that an era 
dating from 57 B.C. existed in the Malava State in Central India, 
and, long after Vikram, this era and calendar were connected 
with him and renamed after him. But all this is vague and un- 
certain. 

What has been most surprising is the way in which quite in- 
telligent Indians have played about with history in order some- 
how to connect the traditional hero, Vikram, with the beginning 
of the era 2,000 years ago. It has also been interesting to find 
how emphasis is laid on his fight against the foreigner and his 
desire to establish the unity of India under one national state. 
Vikram' s realm was, in fact, confined to North and Central 
India. 

It is not Indians only who are affected by nationalist urges 
and supposed national interest in the writing or consideration 
of history. Every nation and people seem to be affected by this 
desire to gild and better the past and distort it to their advan- 
tage. The histories of India that most of us have had to read, 
chiefly written by Englishmen, are usually long apologies for 
and panegyrics of British rule, and a barely veiled contemptuous 
account of what happened here in the millenniums preceding it. 
Indeed, real history for them begins with the advent of the 
Englishman into India; all that went before is in some mystic 
kind of way a preparation for this divine consummation. Even 
the British period is distorted with the object of glorifying 
British rule and British virtues. Very slowly a more correct per- 
spective is developing. But we need not go to the past to find 
instances of the manipulation of history to suit particular ends 
and support one's own fancies and prejudices. The present is 
full of this, and if the present, which we have ourselves seen and 
experienced, can be so distorted, what of the past? 

Nevertheless, it is true that Indians are peculiarly liable to 
accept tradition and report as history, uncritically and without 
sufficient examination. They will have to rid themselves of this 
loose thinking and easy way of arriving at conclusions. 

Bui I have digressed and wandered away from the gods and 
goddesses and the days when myth and legend began. Those 
were the days when life was full and in harmony with nature, 
when man's mind gazed with wonder and delight at the mystery 
of the universe, when heaven and earth seemed very near to 
each other, and the gods and goddesses came down from Kailasa 
or their other Himalayan haunts, even as the gods of Olympus 
used to come down, to play with and sometimes punish men and 



women. Out of this abundant life and rich imagination grew 
myth and legend and strong and beautiful gods and goddesses, 
for the ancient Indians, like the Greeks, were lovers of beauty 
and of life. Professor Gilbert Murray* tells us of the sheer beauty 
of the Olympian system. That description might well apply to 
the early creations of the Indian mind also. 'They are artists' 
dreams, ideals, allegories; they are symbols of something beyond 
themselves. They are gods of half-rejected tradition, of uncons- 
cious make-believe, of aspiration. They are gods to whom doubt- 
ful philosophers can pray, with all a philosopher's due caution, 
as to many radiant and heart-searching hypotheses. They are 
not gods in whom anyone believes as a hard fact.' Equally 
applicable to India is what Professor Murray adds: 'As the most 
beautiful image carved by man was not the god, but only a 
symbol to help towards conceiving the god; so the god himself, 
when conceived, was not the reality but only a symbol to help 

towards conceiving the reality Meanwhile they issued no 

creeds that contradicted knowledge, no commands that made 
man sin against his own inner light.' 

Gradually the days of the Vedic and other gods and goddesses 
receded into the background and hard and abstruse philosophy 
took their place. But in the minds of the people these images 
still floated, companions in joy and friends in distress, symbols 
of their own vaguely-felt ideals and aspirations. And round them 
poets wrapped their fancies and built the houses of their dreams, 
full of rich embroidery and lovely fantasy. Many of these legends 
and poets' fancies have been delightfully adapted by F. W. Bain 
in his series of little books containing stories from Indian my- 
thology. In one of these, 'The Digit of the Moon,' we are told 
of the creation of woman. 'In the beginning, when Twaslitri 
(the Divine Artificer) came to the creation of woman he found 
that he had exhausted his materials in the making of man and 
that no solid elements were left. In this dilemma, after pro- 
found meditation, he did as follows: he took the rotundity of 
the moon, and the curves of the creepers, and the clinging of 
tendrils, and the trembling of grass, and the slenderness of the 
reed, and the bloom of flowers, and the lightness of leaves, and 
the tapering of the elephant's trunk, and the glances of deer, 
and the clustering of rows of bees, and the joyous gaiety of sun- 
beams, and the weeping of clouds, and the fickleness of the winds, 
and the timidity of the hare, and the vanity of the peacock, and 
the softness of the parrot's bosom, and the hardness of adamant, 
and the sweetness of honey, and the cruelty of the tiger, and the 
warm glow of fire, and the coldnesss of snow, and the chattering of 

^Gilbert Murray's 'Five Stages of Creek Religion,' p. 76. (Thinkers' Library, Watts, 
Tjmion.) 



jays, and the cooing of the kokila, and the hypocrisy of the crane, 
and the fidelity of the chakravaka; and compounding all these 
together, he made woman and gave her to man.' 

The Mahabharata 

It is difficult to date the epics. They deal with remote periods 
when the Aryans were still in the process of settling down and 
consolidating themselves in India. Evidently many authors have 
written them or added to them in successive periods. The Rama- 
yana is an epic poem with a certain unity of treatment; the 
Mahabharata is a vast and miscellaneous collection of ancient 
lore. Both must have taken shape in the pre-Buddhist period, 
though additions were no doubt made later. 

Michelet, the French historian, writing in 1864, with special 
reference to the Ramayana, says: 'Whoever has done or willed 
too much let him drink from this deep cup a long draught of 

life and youth Everything is narrow in the west — Greece is 

small and I stifle; Judea is dry and I pant. Let me look towards 
lofty Asia and the profound East for a little while. There lies 
my great poem, as vast as the Indian Ocean, blessed, gilded with 
the sun, the book of divine harmony wherein is no dissonance. 
A serene peace reigns there, and in the midst of conflict an 
infinite sweetness, a boundless fraternity, which spreads over all 
living things, an ocean (without bottom or bound) of love, of 
pity, of clemency.' 

Great as the Ramayana is as an epic poem, and loved by the 
people, it is really the Mahabharata that is one of the outstand- 
ing books of the world. It is a colossal work, an encyclopaedia of 
tradition and legend, and political and social institutions of 
ancient India. For a decade or more a host of competent Indian 
scholars have been engaged in critically examining and collating 
the various available texts, with a view to publishing an autho- 
rized edition. Some parts have been issued by them but the 
work is still incomplete and is proceeding. It is interesting to 
note that even in these days of total and horrible war, Russian 
oriental scholars have produced a Russian translation of the 
Mahabharata. 

Probably this was I he period when foreign elements were 
coming into India and bringing their customs with them. Many 
of these customs were unlike those of the Aryans, and so a curious 
mixture of opposing ideas and customs is observable. There was 
no polyandry among the Aryans, and yet one of the leading 
heroines of the Mahabharata story is the common wife of five 
brothers. Gradually the absorption of the earlier indigenous 
elements as well as of newcomers was taking place, and the Vedic 



religion was being modified accordingly. It was beginning to 
take that all-inclusive form which led to modern Hinduism. 

This was possible, as the basic approach seems to have been 
that there could be no monoply in truth, and there were many 
ways of seeing it and approaching it. So all kinds of different 
and even contradictory beliefs were tolerated. 

In the Mahabharata a very definite attempt has been made 
to emphasize the fundamental unity of India, or Bharatvarsha as 
it was called, from Bharat, the legendary founder of the race. 
An earlier name was Aryavarta, the land of the Aryas, but this 
was confined to Northern India up to the Vindhya mountains 
in Central India. The Aryans had probably not spread beyond 
that mountain range at that period. The Ramayana story is one 
of Aryan expansion to the south. The great civil war, which 
occurred later, described in the Mahabharata, is vaguely sup- 
posed to hwe taken place about the fourteenth century B.C. 
That war was for the ovcrlordship of India (or possibly of nor- 
thern fndia), and it marks the beginning of the conception of 
India as a whole, of Bharatvarsha. In this conception a large 
part of modern Afghanistan, then called Gandhara (from which 
the name of the present city of Kandahar), which was considered 
an integral part of the country was included. Indeed the queen 
of the principal ruler was named Gandhari, the lady from 
Gandhara. Dilli or Delhi, not the modern city but ancient cities 
situated near the modern site, named Hastinapur and Indra- 
prastha, becomes the metropolis of India. 

Sister Nivedita (Margaret Noble), writing about the Maha- 
bharata, has pointed out: 'The foreign reader... is at once 
struck by two features: in the first place its unity in complexity; 
and, in the second, its constant efforts to impress on its hearers 
the idea of a single centralized India, with a heroic tradition 
of her own as formative and uniting impulse.'* 

The Mahabharata contains the Krishna legends and the 
famous poem, the Bhagavad Gita. Even apart from the philo- 
sophy of the Gita, it lays stress on ethical and moral principles 
in statecraft and in life generally. Without this foundation of 
dharma there is no true happiness and society cannot hold together. 
The aim is social welfare, not the welfare of a particular group 
only but of the whole world, for 'the entire world of mortals is a 
self-dependent organism.' Yet dharma itself is relative and depends 
on the times and the conditions prevailing, apart from some basic 
principles, such as adherence to truth, non-violence, etc. These 
principles endure and do not change, but othewise dharma, that 

*/ have taken this quotation from Sir S. Radhakrishnan's 'Indian Philosophy'. I am in- 
debted to Radhakrishnan for other quotations and much else in this and other chapters. 



amalgam of duties and responsibilities, changes with the changing 
age. The emphasis on non-violence, here and elsewhere, is inter- 
esting, for no obvious contradiction appears to be noticed between 
this and fighting for a righteous cause. The whole epic centres 
round a great war. Evidently the conception of ahimsa, non-violence, 
had a great deal to do with the motive, the absence of the violent 
mental approach, self-discipline and control of anger and hatred, 
rather than the physical abstention from violent action, when this 
became necessary and inevitable. 

The Mahabharata is a rich storehouse in which we can dis- 
cover all manner of precious things. It is full of a varied, abun- 
dant and bubbling life, something far removed from that other 
aspect of Indian thought which emphasized asceticism and 
negation. It is not merely a book of moral precepts though there 
is plenty of ethics and morality in it. The teaching of the Maha- 
bharata has been summed up in the phrase: 'Thou shalt not 
do to others what is disagreeable to thyself.' There is an Empha- 
sis on social welfare and this is noteworthy, for the tendency of 
the Indian mind is supposed to be in favour of individual per- 
fection rather than social welfare. It says: 'Whatever is not con- 
ducive to social welfare, or what ye are likely to be ashamed 
of, never do.' Again: 'Truth, self-control, asceticism, generosity, 
non-violence, constancy in virtue — these are the means of success, 
not caste or family.' 'Virtue is better than immortality and life.' 
'True joy entails suffering.' There is a dig at the seeker after 
wealth: 'The silkworm dies of its wealth.' And, finally, the 
injunction so typical of a living and advancing people; 'Discontent 
is the spur of progress.' 

There is in the Mahabharata the polytheism of the Vedas, the 
monism of the Upanishads, and deisms, and dualisms, and 
monotheism. The outlook is still creative and more or less 
rationalistic, and the feeling of exclusiveness is yet limited. Caste 
is not rigid. There was still a feeling of confidence, but as external 
forces invaded and challenged the security of the old order, 
that confidence lessened somewhat and a demand for greater 
uniformity arose in order to produce internal unity and 
strength. New taboos grew up. The eating of beef, previously 
countenanced, is later absolutely prohibited. In the Mahabharata 
there are references to beef or veal being offered to honoured 
guests. 

The Bhagavad Gita 

The Bhagavad Gita is part of the Mahabharata, an episode in the 
vast drama. But it stands apart and is complete in itself. It is a 
relatively small poem of 700 verses — 'the most beautiful, perhaps 

108 



the only true philosophical song existing in any known tongue,' 
so William von Humboldt described it. Its popularity and influ- 
ence have not waned ever since it was composed and written in 
the pre-Buddhistic age, and to-day its appeal is as strong as ever 
in India. Every school of thought and philosophy looks up to it 
and interprets it in its own way. In times of crisis, when the mind 
of man is tortured by doubt and is torn by the conflict of duties, 
it has turned all the more to the Gita for light and guidance. For 
it is a poem of crisis, of political and social crisis and, even more so, 
of crisis in the spirit of man. Innumerable commentaries on the 
Gita have appeared in the past and they continue to come out with 
unfailing regularity. Even the leaders of thought and action of the 
present day — Tilak, Aurobindo Ghose, Gandhi — have written on 
it, each giving his own interpretation. Gandhiji bases his firm 
belief in non-violence on it, others justify violence and warfare 
for a righteous cause. 

The poem begins with a conversation between Arjuna and 
Krishna on the very field of battle before the great war begins. 
Arjuna is troubled, his conscience revolts at the thought of the war 
and the mass murder that it involves, the killing of friends and 
relatives — for what purpose? What conceivable gain can outweigh 
this loss, this sin? All his old standards fail him, his values collapse. 
Arjuna becomes the symbol of the tortured spirit of man, which, 
from age to age, has been torn by conflicting obligations and mora- 
lities. From this personal conversation we are taken step by step 
to higher and more impersonal regions of individual duty and social 
behaviour, of the application of ethics to human life, of the spiritual 
outlook that should govern all. There is much that is metaphysical 
in it, and an attempt to reconcile and harmonize the three ways 
for human advancement: the path of the intellect or knowledge, 
the path of action, and the path of faith. Probably more emphasis 
is laid on faith than on the others, and even a personal god 
emerges, though he is considered as a manifestation of the abso- 
lute. The Gita deals essentially with the spiritual background of 
human existence and it is in this context that the practical prob- 
lems of everyday life appear. It is a call to action to meet the 
obligations and duties of life, but always keeping in view that 
spiritual background and the larger purpose of the universe. Inac- 
tion is condemned, and action and life have to be in accordance 
with the highest ideals of the age, for these ideals themselves may 
vary from age to age. The jugadharma, the ideal of the particular 
age, has always to be kept in view. 

Because modern India is full of frustration and has suffered 
from too much quietism, this call to action makes a special 
appeal. It is also possible to interpret that action in modern 
terms as action for social betterment and social service, practical, 



altruistic, patriotic and humanitarian. Such action is desirable, 
according to the Gita, but behind it must lie the spiritual ideal. 
And action must be in a spirit of detachment, not much con- 
cerned with its results. The law of cause and effect holds good 
under all circumstances; right action must therefore necessarily 
yield right results, though these might not be immediately 
apparent. 

The message of the Gita is not sectarian or addressed to any 
particular school of thought. It is universal in its approach for 
everyone, Brahmin or outcaste: "All paths lead to Me,' it says. 
It is because of this universality that it has found favour with all 
classes and schools. There is something in it which seems to be 
capable of being constantly renewed, which does not become 
out of date with the passing of time — an inner quality of earnest 
inquiry and search, of contemplation and action, of balance and 
equilibrium in spite of conflict and contradiction. There is a 
poise in it and a unity in the midst of disparity, and its temper 
is one of supremacy over the changing environment, not by 
seeking escape from it but fitting in with it. During the 2,500 
years since it was written, Indian humanity has gone repeatedly 
through the processes of change and development and decay; 
experience has succeeded experience, thought has followed 
thought, but it has always found something living in the Gita, 
something that fitted into the developing thought and had a 
freshness and applicability to the spiritual problems that afflict 
the mind. 

Life and Work in Ancient India 

A great deal has been done by scholars and philosophers to trace 
the development of philosophic and metaphysical thought in 
the India of the past; much has also been done to fix the chro- 
nology of historic events and draw in broad outline political 
maps of those periods. But not much has so far been done to 
investigate the social and economic conditions of those days, 
how people lived, carried on their work, what they produced and 
how, and the way trade functioned. Greater attention is being 
paid to these vital questions how and some works by Indian scho- 
lars, and one by an American, have appeared. But a great deal 
remains to be done. The Mahabharata itself is a storehouse of 
sociological and other data and many more books will no doubt 
yield useful information. But they have to be critically examined 
from this particular point of view. One book of inestimable 
value is Kautilya's 'Arthashastra' of the fourth century B.C., 
which gives details of the political, social, economic, and mili- 
tary organization of the Maurya Empire. 



An earlier account, which definitely takes us back to the pre- 
Buddhist period in India, is contained in the collection of the 
Jataka tales. These Jatakas were given their present shape some- 
time after the Buddha. They are supposed to deal with the pre- 
vious incarnations of the Buddha and have become an impor- 
tant part of Buddhist literature. But the stories are evidently 
much older and they deal with the pre-Buddhistic period and 
give us much valuable information about life in India in those 
days. Professor Rhys Davids has described them as the oldest, 
most complete and most important collection of folklore extant. 
Many of the subsequent collection of animal and other stories 
which were written in India and found their way to western 
Asia and Europe can be traced to the Jatakas. 

The Jatakas deal with the period when the final amalgama- 
tion of the two principal races of India, the Dravidians and the 
Aryans, was taking place. They reveal 'a multiform and chaotic 
society which resists more or less every attempt at classification 
and about which there can be no talk of an organization accord- 
ing to caste in that age.'* The Jatakas may be said to represent 
the popular tradition as contrasted with the priestly or Brah- 
minic tradition and the Kshatriya or ruling class tradition. 

There are chronologies and genealogies of various kingdoms 
and their rulers. Kingship, originally elective, becomes heredi- 
tary according to the rule of primogeniture. Women are ex- 
cluded from this succession, but there are exceptions. As in 
China, the ruler is held responsible for all misfortunes; if any- 
thing goes wrong the fault must lie with the king. There was a 
council of ministers and there are also references to some kind 
of State assembly. Nevertheless the king was an autocratic 
monarch though he had to function within established conven- 
tions. The high priest had an important position in court as an 
adviser and person in charge of religious ceremonies. There are 
references to popular revolts against unjust and tyrannical kings, 
who are sometimes put to death for their crimes. 

Village assemblies enjoyed a measure of autonomy. The chief 
source of revenue was the land. The land-tax was supposed to 
represent the king's share of the produce, and it was usually, but 
not always, paid in kind. Probably this tax was about one-sixth 
of the produce. It was predominantly an agricultural civilization 
and the basic unit was the self-governing village. The political 
and economic structure was built up from these village com- 
munities which were grouped in tens and hundreds. Horticulture, 
rearing of livestock, and dairy farming were practised on 

* Richard Fkk 'The Social Organisation in North-East India in Buddha's Time' (Calcutta, 
1920), p. 286. A more recent book, chiefly based on the Jataka stories, is Ratilal Mehta's 
' Pre-Buddhist India' (Bombay, 1939). I am indebted to this latter book/or most of my facts. 



an extensive scale. Gardens and parks were common, and fruits 
and flowers were valued. The list of flowers mentioned is a long 
one; among the favourite fruits were the mango, fig, grape, 
plantain and the date. There were evidently many shops of 
vegetable and fruit sellers in the cities, as well as of florists. 
The flower-garland was then, as now, a favourite of the Indian 
people. 

Hunting was a regular occupation chiefly for the food it pro- 
vided. Flesh-eating was common and included poultry and fish; 
venison was highly esteemed. There were fisheries and slaughter- 
houses. The principal articles of diet were, however, rice, wheat, 
millet and corn. Sugar was extracted from sugar-cane. Milk and 
its varioys products were then, as they are now, highly prized. 
There were liquor shops, and liquor was apparently made from 
rice, fruits and sugar-cane. 

There was mining for metals and precious stones. Among the 
metals mentioned are gold, silver, copper, iron, lead, tin, and 
brass. Among the precious stones were diamonds, rubies, corals, 
also pearls. Gold, silver and copper coins are referred to. There 
were partnerships for trade, and loans were advanced on interest. 

Among the manufactured goods are silks, woollens and cotton 
textiles, rugs, blankets and carpets. Spinning, weaving and dye- 
ing are flourishing and widespread industries. The metallurgical 
industry produces weapons of war. The building industry uses 
stone, wood, and bricks. Carpenters make a variety of furniture, 
etc., including carts, chariots, ships, bedsteads, chairs, benches, 
chests, toys, etc. Cane-workers make mattresses, baskets, fans, and 
sunshades. Potters function in every village. From flowers and 
sandalwood a number of perfumes, oils and 'beauty' products 
are made, including sandalwood powder. Various medicines and 
drugs are manufactured and dead bodies are sometimes em- 
balmed. 

Apart from the many kinds of artisans and craftsmen who are 
mentioned, various other professions are referred to: teachers, 
physicians and surgeons, merchants and traders, musicians, astro- 
logers, greengrocers, actors, dancers, itinerant jugglers, acrobats, 
puppet-players, pedlars. 

Domestic slavery appears to have been fairly common, but 
agricultural and other work was done with the help of hired 
labour. There were even then some untouchables — the chan- 
dalas as they were called, whose chief business was the disposal 
of dead bodies. 

Trade associations and craft-guilds had already assumed im- 
portance. 'The existence of trade associations,' says Fick, 'which 
grew partly for economical reasons, better employment of capi- 
tal, facilities of intercourse, partly for protecting the legal in- 



terest of their class, is surely to be traced to an early period of 
Indian culture.' The Jatakas say that there were eighteeen craft- 
unions but they actually mention only four: the wood-workers 
and the masons, the smiths, the leather workers, and the pain- 
ters. 

Even in the Epics there are references to trade and craft 
organizations. The Mahabharata says: 'the safeguard of corpora- 
tions (guilds) is union.' It is said that 'the merchant-guilds were 
of such authority that the king was not allowed to establish any 
laws repugnant to these trade unions. The heads of guilds are 
mentioned next after priests as objects of a king's anxious con- 
cern.'* The chief of the merchants, the shreshthi (modern seth), 
was a man of very considerable importance. 

One rather extraordinary development emerges from the 
Jataka accounts. This is the establishment of special settlements 
or villages of people belonging to particular crafts. Thus there 
was a carpenters' village, consisting, it is said, of 1,000 families; 
a smiths' village, and so on. These specialized villages were usually 
situated near a city, which absorbed their special products and 
which provided them with the other necessaries of life. The 
whole village apparently worked on co-operative lines and 
undertook large orders. Probably out of this separate living 
and organization the caste system developed and spread out. 
The example set by the Brahmins and the nobility was gradually 
followed by the manufacturers' corporations and trade guilds. 

Great roads, with travellers' rest houses and occasional hos- 
pitals, covered north India and connected distant parts of the 
country. Trade flourished not only in the country itself but 
between India and foreign countries. There was a colony of 
Indian merchants living at Memphis in Egypt about the fifth 
century B.C. as the discovery of modelled heads of Indians there 
has shown. Probably there was trade also between India and the 
islands of South-East Asia. 

Overseas trade involved shipping and it is clear that ships 
were built in India both for the inland waterways and for ocean 
traffic. There are references in the Epics to shipping duties being 
paid by 'merchants coming from afar.' 

The Jatakas are full of references to merchants' voyages. 
There were overland caravans across deserts going westward to 
the seaport of Broach and north towards Gandhara and Central 
Asia. From Broach ships went to the Persian Gulf for Babylon 
(Baveru). There was a great deal of river traffic and, according 
to the Jatakas, ships travelled from Benares, Patna, Champa 
(Bhagalpur) and other places to the sea and thence to southern 
ports and Ceylon and Malaya. Old Tamil poems tell us of the 

*Prof. E. Washburn Hopkins in 'Cambridge History of India', Vol I, p. 269. 



flourishing port of Kaveripattinam on the Kaveri river in the 
South, which was a centre of international trade. These ships 
must have been fairly large as it is said in the Jatakas that 
'hundreds' of merchants and emigrants embarked on a ship. 

In the 'Milinda' (this is of the first century A.C. Milinda is the 
Greek Bactrian king of North India who became an ardent 
Buddhist) it is said: 'As a shipowner who has become wealthy 
by constantly levying freight in some seaport town will be able 
to traverse the high seas, and go to Vanga (Bengal) or Takkola, 
or China or Sovira, or Surat or Alexandria, or the Koromandel 
coast, or Further India, or any other place where ships do congre- 
gate.'* 

Among the exports from India were: 'Silks, muslins, the finer 
sorts of cloth, cutlery and armour, brocades, embroideries and 
rugs, perfumes and drugs, ivory and ivory work, jewellery and 
gold (seldom silver); these were the main articles in which the 
merchant dealt. 'f 

India, or rather North India, was famous for her weapons of 
war, especially for the quality of her steel, her swords and dag- 
gers. In the fifth century B.C. a large body of Indian troops, 
cavalry and infantry, accompanied the Persian army to Greece. 
When Alexander invaded Persia, it is stated in the famous Persian 
epic poem, Firdusi's 'Shahnamah', that swords and other weapons 
were hurriedly sent for by the Persians from India. The old 
(pre-Islamic) Arabic word for sword is 'muhannad,' which means 
'from Hind' or Indian. This word is in common use still. 

Ancient India appears to have made considerable progress in 
the treatment of iron. There is an enormous iron pillar near 
Delhi which has baffled modern scientists who have been unable 
to discover by what process it was made, which has enabled it to 
withstand oxidation and other atmospheric changes. The inscrip- 
tion on it is in the Gupta script which was in use from the fourth 
to the seventh century AC. Some scholars are, however, of opinion 
that the pillar itself is much older than this inscription, which was 
added later. 

Alexander's invasion of India in the fourth century B.C. was, 
from a military point of view, a minor affair. It was more of a 
raid across the border, and not a very successful raid for him. 
He met with such stout resistance from a border chieftain that 
the contemplated advance into the heart of India had to be 
reconsidered. If a small ruler on the frontier could fight thus, 
what of the larger and more powerful kingdoms further south? 
Probably this was the main reason why his army refused to 
march further and insisted on returning. 

'Mrs. C. A. F. Rhys Davids in 'Cambridge History of India', Vol. I, p. 212. 
{Rhys Davids. 'Buddhist India', p. 98. 



The quality of India's -military strength was seen very soon 
after Alexander's return and death, when Seleucus attempted 
another invasion. He was defeated by Chandragupta and driven 
back. Indian armies then had an advantage which others lacked; 
this was the possession of trained war-elephants, which might 
be compared to the tanks of to-day. Seleucus Nikator obtained 
500 of these war-elephants from India for his campaign against 
Antigonus in Asia Minor in 302 B.C., and military historians 
say that these elephants were the decisive factor in the battle 
which ended in the death of Antigonus and the flight of his son 
Demetrius. 

There are books on the training of elephants, the breeding 
of horses, etc.; each one of these called a shastra. This word has 
come to mean scripture or holy writ, but it was applied indis- 
criminately to every kind of knowledge and science, varying from 
mathematics to dancing. In fact the line between religious and 
secular knowledge was not strictly drawn. They overlapped and 
everything that seemed useful to life was the object of inquiry. 

Writing in India goes back to the most ancient times. Old 
pottery belonging to the Neolithic period is inscribed with 
writing in the Brahmi characters. Mohenjo-daro has inscriptions 
which have not so far been wholly deciphered. The Brahmi 
inscriptions found all over India are undoubtedly the basic script 
from which devanagari and others have arisen in India. Some of 
Ashoka's inscriptions are in the Brahmi script; others, in the north- 
west, are in the Kharoshti script. 

As early as the sixth or seventh century B.C., Panini wrote his 
great grammar of the Sanskrit language.* He mentions previous 
grammars and already in his time Sanskrit had crystallized and 
become the language of an ever-growing literature. Panini's 
book is something more than a mere grammar. It has been 
described by the Soviet professor Th. Stcherbatsky, of Lenin- 
grad, as 'one of the greatest productions of the human mind.' 
Panini is still the standard authority on Sanskrit grammar, 
though subsequent grammarians have added to it and interpret- 
ed it. It is interesting to note that Panini mentions the Greek 
script. This indicates that there were some kind of contacts 
between India and the Greeks long before Alexander came to 
the East. 

The study of astronomy was especially pursued and it often 
merged into astrology. Medicine had its textbooks and there 
were hospitals. Dhanwantari is the legendary founder of the 
Indian science of medicine. The best known old textbooks, 

* Keith and some others place Panini at c. 300 B.C., hut the balance of authority seems to 
be clear that Panini lived and wrote before the commencement of the Buddhist period. 



however, date from the early centuries of the Christian era. 
These are by Charak on medicine and Sushruta on surgery. 
Charak is supposed to have been the royal court physician of 
Kanishka who had his capital in the north-west. These textbooks 
enumerate a large number of diseases and give methods of diag- 
nosis and treatment. They deal with surgery, obstetrics, baths, 
diet, hygiene, infant-feeding, and medical education. The 
approach was experimental, and dissection of dead bodies was 
being practised in the course of surgical training. Various sur- 
gical instruments are mentioned by Sushruta, as well as opera- 
tions, including amputation of limbs, abdominal, caesarean sec- 
tion, cataract, etc. Wounds were sterilized by fumigation. In the 
third or fourth century B.C. there were also hospitals for animals. 
This was probably due to the influence of Jainism and Buddhism 
with their emphasis on non-violence. 

In mathematics the ancient Indians made some epoch-making 
discoveries, notably that of the zero sign, of the decimal place- 
value system, of the use of the minus sign, and the use in algebra 
of letters of the alphabet to denote unknown quantities. It is 
difficult to date these, as there was always a big time-lag bet- 
ween the discovery and its practical application. But it is clear 
that the beginnings of arithmetic, algebra, and geometry were 
laid in the earliest period. Ten formed the basis of enumeration 
ip India even at the time of the Rig Veda. The time and number 
sense of the ancient Indians was extraordinary. They had 
a long series of number names for very high numerals. 
The Greeks, Romans, Persians, and Arabs had apparently no 
terminology for denominations above the thousand or at most 
the myriad (10 4 = 10,000). In India there were eighteen specific 
denominations (10 18 ), and there are even longer lists. In the 
story of Buddha's early education he is reported to have named 
denominations up to 10 50 . 

At the other end of the scale there was a minute division of time 
of which the smallest unit was approximately one-seventeenth of 
a second, and the smallest lineal measure is given as something 
which approximates to 1 37 X 7- 10 inches. All these big and 
small figures were no doubt entirely theoretical and used for 
philosophical purposes. Nevertheless, the old Indians, unlike 
other ancient nations, had vast conceptions of time and space. 
They thought in a big way. Even their mythology deals 
with ages of hundreds of millions of years. To them the vast 
periods of modern geology or the astronomical distances of the 
stars would not have come as a surprise. Because of this back- 
ground, Darwin's and other similar theories"could not create in 
India the turmoil and inner conflict which they produced in 
Europe in the middle of the nineteenth century. The popular 



mind in Europe was used to a time scale which did not go beyond 
a few thousand years. 

In the 'Arthashastra' we are given the weights and measures 
which were in use in North India in the fourth century B.C. 
There used to be careful supervision of the weights in the market 
places. 

In the epic period we have frequent mention of some kind of 
forest universities, situated not far from a town or city, where 
students gathered round well-known scholars for training and 
education, which comprised a variety of subjects, including 
military training. These forest abodes were preferred so as to 
avoid the distractions of city life and enable the students to 
lead a disciplined and continent life. After some years of this 
training they were supposed to go back and live as householders 
and citizens. Probably these forest schools consisted of small 
groups, though there are indications that a popular teacher 
would attract large numbers. 

Benares has always been a centre of learning, and even in 
Buddha's day it was old and known as such. It was in the Deer 
Park near Benares that Buddha preached his first sermon; but 
Benares does not appear to have been at any time anything like 
a university, such as existed then and later in other parts of India. 
There were numerous groups there, consisting of a teacher and 
his disciples, and often between rival groups there was fierce 
debate and argument. 

But in the north-west, near modern Peshawar, there was an 
ancient and famous university at Takshashila or Taxila. This 
was particularly noted for science, especially medicine, and the 
arts, and people went to it from distant parts of India. The 
Jataka stories are full of instances of sons of nobles and Brahmins 
travelling, unattended and unarmed, to Taxila to be educated. 
Probably students came also from Central Asia and Afghanistan, 
as it was conveniently situated. 

It was considered an honour and a distinction to be a graduate 
of Taxila. Physicians who had studied in the school of medicine 
there were highly thought of, and it is related that whenever 
Buddha felt unwell his admirers brought to him a famous 
physician who had graduated from Taxila. Panini, the great 
grammarian of the sixth-seventh century B.C., is said to have 
studied there. 

Taxila was thus a pre-Buddhist university and a seat of 
Brahminical learning. During the Buddhist period it became 
also a centre of Buddhist scholarship and attracted Buddhist 
students from all over India and across the border. It was the 
headquarters of the north-western province of the Maurya 
Empire. 

117 



The legal position of women, according to Manu, the earliest 

exponent of the law, was definitely bad. They were always 
dependent on somebody — on the father, the husband, or the son. 
Almost they were treated, in law, as chattels. And yet from the 
numerous stories in the Epics this law was not applied very 
rigidly and they held an honoured place in the home and in 
society. The old law-giver, Manu, himself says: 'Where women 
are honoured the gods dwell.' There is no mention of women 
students at Taxila or any of the old universities; but some of them 
did function as students somewhere, for there is repeated mention 
of learned and scholarly women. In later ages also there were 
a number of eminent women scholars. Bad as the legal position 
of women was in ancient India, judged by modern standards, 
it was far better than in ancient Greece and Rome, in early 
Christianity, in the Canon Law of mediaeval Europe, and indeed 
right up to comparatively modern times at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century. 

The exponents of the law from Manu onwards refer to forms 
of partnership in business. Manu refers chiefly to priests; Yag- 
navalkya includes trade and agriculture. A later writer, Narada, 
says: 'Loss, expense, profit of each partner are equal to, more 
than, or less than those of other partners according as his share 
(invested) is equal, greater, or less. Storage, food, charges (tolls), 
loss, freightage, expense of keeping, must be paid by each partner 
in accordance with the terms of agreement.' 

Manu's conception of a state was evidently that of a small 
kingdom. This conception was, however, growing and changing, 
leading to the vast Maurya Empire of the fourth century B.C. 
and to international contacts with the Greek world. 

Megasthenes, the Greek Ambassador in India in the fourth 
century B.C., totally denies the existence of slavery in India. 
But in this he was wrong as there were certainly domestic slaves, 
and there are references in Indian books of the period to im- 
proving the lot of the slaves. L is clear, however, that there was 
no large-scale slavery and no slave gangs for labour purposes, 
as were common in many countries then, and this may have led 
Megasthenes to believe that slavery was completely absent. It 
was laid down that 'Never shall an Arya be subjected to slavery.' 
Who exactly was an Arya, and who was not, it is difficult to say, 
but the Aryan fold at that time had come to mean rather vaguely 
all the four basic castes, including the shudras, but not the 
untouchables. 

In China also, in the days of the early Han Dynasty, slaves 
were used primarily in domestic service. They were unimpor- 
tant in agriculture or in large-scale labour works. Both in India 
and China these domestic slaves formed a very small propor- 

118 



tion of the population, and in this important respect there was 
thus a vast difference between Indian and Chinese society and 
contemporary Greek and Roman society. 

What were the Indians like in those distant days? It is diffi- 
cult for us to conceive of a period so far and so different from 
ours, and yet some vague picture emerges from the miscellane- 
ous data that we have. They were a light-hearted race, confident 
and proud of their traditions, dabbling in the search for the 
mysterious, full of questions addressed to nature and human 'life, 
attaching importance to the standards and values they had created, 
but taking life easily and joyously, and facing death without much 
concern. 

Arrian, the Greek historian of Alexander's campaign in North 
India, was struck by this light-hartedness of the race. 'No nation,' 
he writes, 'is fonder of singing and dancing than the Indian.' 

Mahavira and Buddha : Caste 

Some such background existed in North India from the time of 
the Epics onwards to the early Buddhist period. It was ever 
changing politically and economically, and the processes of 
synthesis and amalgamation, as well as the specialization of 
labour, were taking place. In the realm of ideas there was con- 
tinuous growth and often conflict. The early Upanishads had 
been followed by the development of thought and activity in 
many directions; they were themselves a reaction against priest- 
craft and ritualism. Men's minds had rebelled against much that 
they saw, and out of that rebellion had grown these early Upa- 
nishads as well as, a little later, the strong current of materialism, 
and Jainism and Buddhism, and the attempt to synthesize 
various forms of belief in the Bhagavad Gita. Out of all this again 
grew the six systems of Indian philosophy. Yet behind all this 
mental conflict and rebellion lay a vivid and growing national 
life. 

Both Jainism and Buddhism were breakaways from the Vedic 
religion and its offshoots, though in a sense they had grown out 
of it. They deny the authority of the Vedas and, most funda- 
mental of all matters, they deny or say nothing about the existence 
of a first cause. Both lay emphasis on non-violence and build up 
organizations of celibate monks and priests. There is a certain 
realism and rationalism in their approach, though inevitably 
this does not carry us very far in our dealings with the invisible 
world. One of the fundamental doctrines of Jainism is that truth 
is relative to our standpoints. It is a rigorous ethical and non- 
transcendental system, laying a special emphasis on the ascetic 
aspect of life and thought. 



Mahavira, the founder of Jainism, and Buddha were contem- 
poraries, and both came from the Kshatriya warrior class. 
Buddha died at the age of eighty, in 544 B.C., and the Buddhist 
era begins then. (This is the traditional date. Historians give a 
later date 487 B.C., but are now inclined to accept the tradi- 
tional date as more correct.) It is an odd coincidence that I am 
writing this on the Buddhist New Year's Day, 2488 — the day 
of the full moon of the month of Vaisakha — the Vaisakhi Purnima, 
as it is called. It is stated in Buddhist literature that Buddha 
was born on this full moon day of Vaisakha (May-June); that 
he attained enlightenment and finally died also on the same day 
of the year. 

Buddha had the courage to attack popular religion, supersti- 
tion, ceremonial, and priestcraft, and all the vested interests that 
clung to them. He condemned also the metaphysical and theo- 
logical outlook, miracles, revelations, and dealings with the super- 
natural. His appeal was to logic, reason, and experience; his 
emphasis was on ethics, and his method was one of psychological 
analysis, a psychology without a soul. His whole approach 
comes like the breath of the fresh wind from the mountains after the 
stale air of metaphysical speculation. 

Buddha did not attack caste directly, yet in his own order 
he did not recognize it, and there is no doubt that his whole 
attitude and activity weakened the caste system. Probably caste 
was very fluid in his day and for some centuries later. It is obvi- 
ous that a caste-ridden pommunity could not indulge in foreign 
trade or other foreign adventures, and yet for fifteen hundred 
years or more after Buddha, trade was developing between India 
and neighbouring countries, and Indian colonies flourished. 
Foreign elements continued to stream into India from the north- 
west and were absorbed. 

It is interesting to observe this process of absorption which 
worked at both ends. New castes were formed at the bottom of 
the scale, and any successful invading element became trans- 
formed soon into Kshatriyas or the ruling class. Coins of the period 
just before and after the beginning of the Christian era show this 
rapid change in the course of two or three generations. The first 
ruler has a foreign name. His son or grandson appears with a 
Sanskrit name and is crowned according to the traditional rites 
meant for Kshatriyas. 

Many of the Rajput Kshatriya clans date back to the Shaka of 
Scythian invasions which began about the second century B.C. 
or from the later invasion of the White Huns. All these accepted 
the faith and institutions of the country and then tried to affiliate 
themselves to the famous heroes of the Epics. Thus the Kshatriya 
group depended on status and occupation rather than on descent, 

120 



and so it was much easier for foreigners to be incorporated into it. 

It is curious and significant that throughout the long span of 
Indian history there have been repeated warnings given by great 
men against priestcraft and the rigidity of the caste system, and 
powerful movements have risen against them; yet slowly, im- 
perceptibly, almost, it seems, as if it were the inevitable course 
of destiny, caste has grown and spread and seized every aspect 
of Indian life in its strangling grip. Rebels against caste have 
drawn many followers, and yet in course of time their group 
has itself become a caste. Jainism, a rebel against the parent 
religion and in many ways utterly different from it, was yet 
tolerant to caste and adapted itself to it; and so it survives and 
continues in India, almost as an offshoot of Hinduism. Bud- 
dhism, not adapting itself to caste, and more independent in its 
thought and outlook, ultimately passes away from India, though 
it influences India and Hinduism profoundly. Christianity comes 
here eighteen hundred years ago and settles down and gradu- 
ally develops its own castes. The Moslem social structure in India, 
in spite of its vigorous denunciation of all such barriers within the 
community, is also partly affected. 

In our own period numerous movements to break the tyranny 
of caste have arisen among the middle classes and they have 
made a difference, but not a vital one, so far as the masses are 
concerned. Their method was usually one of direct attack. Then 
Gandhi came and tackled the problem, after the immemorial 
Indian fashion, in an indirect way, and his eyes were on the 
masses. He has been direct enough, aggressive enough, persistent 
enough, but without challenging the original basic functional 
theory underlying the four main castes. He has attacked the rank 
undergrowth and overgrowth, knowing well that he was under- 
mining the whole caste structure thereby.* He has already 
shaken the foundations and the masses have been powerfully 
affected. For them the whole structure holds or breaks altoge- 
ther. But an even greater power than he is at work: the condi- 
tions of modern life — and it seems that at last this hoary and 
tenacious relic of past times must die. 

But while we struggle with caste in India (which, in its origin, 



*Gandhiji's references to caste have been progressively stronger and more pointed, and he 
has made it repeatedly clear that caste as a whole and as it exists must be eliminated. Referr- 
ing to the constructive programme which he has placed before the nation, he says: '/( has 
undoubtedly independence, political, social and economic, as its aim. It is a moral, non-violent 
revolution in all the departments of life of a big nation, at the end of which caste and un- 
touchability and such other superstitions must vanish, differences between Hindu ahd Muslim 
become things of the past, enmity against Englishmen or Europeans must be wholly forgotten 
And again quite recently: 'The caste system, as we know, is an anachronism. It must go if 
both Hinduism and India are to live and grow from day to day. ' 

27 



was based on colour), new and overbearing castes have arisen in 
the west with doctrines of racial exclusiveness, sometimes cloth- 
ed in political and economic terms, and even speaking in the 
language of democracy. 

Before the Buddha, seven hundred years before Christ, a great 
Indian, the sage and lawgiver Yagnavalkya, is reported to have 
said: 'It is not our religion, still less the colour of our skin, that 
produces virtue; virtue must be practised. Therefore, let no one 
do to others what he would not have done to himself.' 

Chandragupta and Chanakya. The Maurya Empire 
Established 

Buddhism spread gradually in India. Although in origin a 
Kshatriya movement, and representing a conflict between the 
ruling class and the priests, its ethical and democratic aspect, 
and more especially its fight against priestcraft and ritualism, 
appealed to the people. It developed as a popular reform move- 
ment, attracting even some Brahmin thinkers. But generally 
Brahmins opposed it and called Buddhists heretics and rebels 
against the established faith. More important than the outward 
progress was the interaction of Buddhism and the older faith on 
each other, and the continuous undermining of Brahmins. Two 
and a half centuries later, the Emperor Ashoka became a con- 
vert to the faith and devoted all his energies to spreading it by 
peaceful missionary efforts in India and foreign countries. 

These two centuries saw many changes in India. Various 
processes had long been going on to bring about racial fusion 
and to amalgamate the petty states and small kingdoms and 
republics; the old urge to build up a united centralized state 
had been working, and out of all this emerged a powerful and 
highly developed empire. Alexander's invasion of the north-west 
gave the final push to this development, and two remarkable 
men arose who could take advantage of the changing conditions 
and mould them according to their will. These men were 
Chandragupta Maurya and his friend and minister and coun- 
sellor, the Brahmin, Chanakya. This combination functioned 
well. Both had been exiled from the powerful Nanda kingdom 
of Magadha, which had its headquarters at Pataliputra (the 
modern Patna); both went to Taxila in the north-west and came 
in contact with the Greeks stationed there by Alexander. Chan- 
dragupta met Alexander himself; he heard of his conquests and 
glory and was fired by ambition to emulate him. Chandragupta 
and Chanakya watched and prepared themselves; they hatched 
great and ambitious schemes and waited for the opportunity to 
realize them. 

122 



Soon news came of Alexander's death at Babylon in 323 B.C., 
and immediately Chandragupta and Chanakya raised the old 
and ever-new cry of nationalism and roused the people against 
the foreign invader. The Greek garrison was driven away and 
Taxila captured. The appeal to nationalism had brought allies 
to Chandragupta and he marched with them across north India 
to Pataliputra. Within two years of Alexander's death, he was in 
possession of that city and kingdom and the Maurya Empire had 
been established. 

Alexander's general, Seleucus, who had inherited after his 
chiefs death the countries from Asia Minor to India, tried to 
re-establish his authority in north-west India and crossed the 
Indus with an army. He was defeated and had to cede a part 
of Afghanistan, up to Kabul and Herat, to Chandragupta, who 
also married the daughter of Seleucus. Except for south India, 
Chandragupta's empire covered the whole of India, from the 
Arabian Sea to the Bay of Bengal, and extended in the north 
to Kabul. For the first time in recorded history a vast centra- 
lized state had risen in India. The city of Pataliputra was the 
capital of this great empire. 

What was this new state like ? Fortunately we have full accounts, 
both Indian and Greek. Megasthenes, the ambassador sent by 
Seleucus, has left a record and, much more important is that 
contemporary account — Kautilya's 'Arthashastra,' the 'Science 
of Polity,' to which reference has already been made. Kautilya 
is another name for Chanakya, and thus we have a book written, 
not only by a great scholar, but a man who played a dominating 
part in the establishment, growth and preservation of the empire. 
Chanakya has been called the Indian Machiavelli, and to some 
extent the comparison is justified. But he was a much bigger person 
in every way, greater in intellect and action. He was no mere 
follower of a king, a humble adviser of an all-powerful emperor. 
A picture of him emerges from an old Indian play — the Mudra- 
Rakshasa — which deals with this period. Bold and scheming, 
proud and revengeful, never forgetting a slight, never forgetting 
his purpose, availing himself of every device to delude and defeat 
the enemy, he sat with the reins of empire in his hands and looked 
upon the emperor more as a loved pupil than as a master. 
Simple and austere in his life, uninterested in the pomp and 
pageantry of high position, when he had redeemed his pledge and 
accomplished his purpose, he wanted to retire, Brahmin-like, to 
a life of contemplation. 

There was hardly anything Chanakya would have refrained 
from doing to achieve his purpose; he was unscrupulous enough; 
yet he was also wise enough to know that this very purpose might 
be defeated by means unsuited to the end. Long before Clause- 



vvitz, he is reported to have said that war is only a continuance 
of state policy by other means. But, he adds, war must always 
serve the larger ends of policy and not become an end in itself; 
the statesman's objective must always be the betterment of the 
state as a result of war, not the mere defeat and destruction of 
the enemy. If war involves both parties in a common ruin, that 
is the bankruptcy of statesmanship. War must be conducted by 
armed forces; but much more important than the force of arms 
is the high strategy which saps the enemy's morale and disrupts 
his forces and brings about his collapse, or takes him to the verge 
of collapse, before armed attack. Unscrupulous and rigid as 
Chanakya was in the pursuit of his aim, he never forgot that it was 
better to win over an intelligent and high-minded enemy than to 
crush him. His final victory was obtained by sowing discord in 
the enemy's ranks, and, in the very moment of this victory, so the 
story goes, he induced Chandragupta to be generous to his rival 
chief. Chanakya himself is said to have handed over the insignia 
of his own high office to the minister of that rival, whose intelli- 
gence and loyalty to his old chief had impressed him greatly. So 
the story ends not in the bitterness of defeat and humiliation, 
but in reconciliation and in laying the firm and enduring found- 
ations of a state, which had not only defeated but won over its 
chief enemy. 

The Maurya Empire maintained diplomatic relations with 
the Greek world, both with Seleucus and his successors and with 
Ptolemy Pliiladelphus. These relations rested on the solid found- 
ation of mutual commercial interest. Strabo tells us that the 
Oxus river in central Asia formed a link in an important chain 
along which Indian goods were carried to Europe by way of the 
Caspian and the Black Sea. This route was popular in the third 
century B.C. Central Asia then was rich and fertile. More than 
a thousand years later it began to dry up. The Arthashastra 
mentions that the king's stud had Arabian steeds'! 

The Organization of the State 

What was this new state like that arose in 321 B.C. and covered 
far the greater part of India, right up to Kabul in the north? 
It was an autocracy, a dictatorship at the top, as most empires 
were and still are. There was a great deal of local autonomy in 
the towns and village units, and elective elders looked after these 
local affairs. This local autonomy was greatly prized and hardly 
any king or supreme ruler interfered with it. Nevertheless, the 
influence and many-sided activities of the central government 
were all-pervasive, and in some ways this Mauryan state reminds 
one of modern dictatorships. There could have been then, in 



a purely agricultural age, nothing like the control of the individual 
by the state which we see to-day. But, in spite of limitations, an 
effort was made to control and regulate life. The state was very 
far from being just a police state, interested in keeping external 
and internal peace and collecting revenue. 

There was a widespread and rigid bureaucracy and there are 
frequent references to espionage. Agriculture was regulated in 
many ways, so were rates of interest. Regulation and periodical 
inspection took place of food, markets, manufacturers, slaughter- 
houses, cattle-raising, water rights, sports, courtesans, and drink- 
ing saloons. Weights and measures were standardized. The 
cornering and adulteration of foodstuffs were rigorously punish- 
ed. Trade was taxed, and, so also in some respects, the practice 
of religion. When there was a breach of regulation or some other 
misdemeanour, the temple monies were confiscated. If rich 
people were found guilty of embezzlement or of profiting from 
national calamity, their property was also confiscated. Sanitation 
and hospitals were provided and there were medical men at the 
chief centres. The state gave relief to widows, orphans, the sick, 
and the infirm. Famine relief was a special care of the state, and 
half the stores in all the state warehouses were always kept in 
reserve for times of scarcity and famine. 

All these rules and regulations were probably applied far 
more to the cities than to the villages; and it is also likely that 
practice lagged far behind theory. Nevertheless, even the theory 
is interesting. The village communities were practically auto- 
nomous. 

Chanakya's Arthashastra deals with a vast variety of subjects 
and covers almost every aspect of the theory and practice of 
government. It discusses the duties of the king, of his ministers 
and councillors, of council meetings, of departments of govern- 
ment, of diplomacy, of war and peace. It gives details of the vast 
army which Chandragupta had, consisting of infantry, cavalry, 
chariots, and elephants.* And yet Chanakya suggests that mere 
numbers do not count for much; without discipline and proper 
leaderhip they may become a burden. Defence and fortifications 
are also dealt with. 

Among the other matters discussed in the book are trade and 
commerce, law and law courts, municipal government, social 
customs, marriage and divorce, rights of women, taxation and 
revenue, agriculture, the working of mines and factories, arti- 
sans, markets, horticulture, manufactures, irrigation, and water- 

* The game ofchess, which had its origin in India, probably developed from this fourfold 
conception of the army. It was called 'chaturanga ' four-limbed, from which came the word 
'shatrang'. Alberuni gives an account of this game as played in India by four players. 



ways, ships and navigation, corporations, census operations, 
fisheries, slaughter houses, passports, and jails. Widow remar- 
riage is recognized; also divorce under certain circumstances. 

There is a reference to chinapatta, silk fabrics of China manu- 
facture, and a distinction is made between these and the silk 
made in India. Probably the latter was of a coarser variety. 
The importation of Chinese silk indicates trade contacts with 
China at least as early as the fourth century B.C. 

The king, at the time of his coronation, had to take the oath 
of service to the people — 'May I be deprived of heaven, of life, 
and of offspring if I oppress you.' 'In the happiness of his sub- 
jects lies his happiness; in their welfare, whatever pleases him- 
self he shall consider as not good, but whatever pleases his sub- 
jects, he shall consider as good.' 'If a king is energetic, his subjects 
will be equally energetic' Public work could not suffer or await 
the king's pleasure; he had always to be ready for it. And if the 
king misbehaved, his people had the right to remove him and 
put another in his place. 

There was an irrigation department to look after the many 
canals, and a navigation department for the harbours, ferries, 
bridges, and the numerous boats and ships that went up and 
down the rivers and crossed the seas to Burma and beyond. 
There was apparently some kind of navy, too, as an adjunct of 
the army. 

Trade flourished in the empire and great roads connected the 
distant parts, with frequent rest-houses for travellers. The chief 
road was named King's Way and this went right across the coun- 
try from the capital to the north-west frontier. Foreign mer- 
chants are especially mentioned and provided for, and seem to 
have enjoyed a kind of extra-territoriality. It is said that the old 
Egyptians wrapped their mummies in Indian muslins and dyed 
their cloth with indigo obtained from India. Some kind of glass 
has also been discovered in the old remains. Megasthenes, the 
Greek ambassador, tells us that the Indians loved finery and 
beauty, and even notes the use of the shoe to add to one's height. 

There was a growth of luxury in the Maurya Empire. Life 
becomes more complicated, specialized," and organized. 'Inns, 
hostelries, eating-houses, serais, and gaming-houses are evidently 
numerous; sects and crafts have their meeting places and the 
latter their public dinners. The business of entertainment pro- 
vides a livelihood for various classes of dancers, singers, and actors. 
Even the villages are visited by them, and the author of the 
Arthashastra is inclined to discourage the existence of a common 
hall used for their shows as too great a distraction from the life 
of the home and the fields. At the same time there are penalties 
for refusal to assist in organizing public entertainment. The king 

.126 



provides in amphitheatres, constructed for the occasion, dra- 
matic, boxing, and other contests of men and animals, and also 
spectacles with displays of pictured objects of curiosity., .not 
seldom the streets were lighted for festivals.'* There were also 
royal processions and hunts. 

There were many populous cities in this vast empire, but the 
chief of them was the capital, Pataliputra, a magnificent city 
spread out along the banks of the Ganges, where the Sone river 
meets it (the modern Patna). Megasthenes describes it thus: 
'At the junction of this river (Ganges) with another is situated 
Palibothra, a city of eighty stadia (9-2 miles) in length and fifteen 
stadia (1-7 miles) in breadth. It is of a shape of a parallelogram 
and is girded with a wooden wall, pierced with loopholes for 
the discharge of arrows. It has a ditch in front for defence and 
for receiving the sewage of the city. This ditch, which encompassed 
it all round, is 600 feet in breadth and thirty cubits in depth, and 
the wall is crowned with 570 towers and has four and sixty gates.' 

Not only was this great wall made of wood, but most of the 
houses also. Apparently this was a precaution against earth- 
quakes, as that area was peculiarly liable to them. In 1934 the 
great Bihar earthquake forcibly reminded us of this fact. Because 
the houses were of wood, very elaborate precautions against fire 
were taken. Every householder had to keep ladders, hooks, and 
vessels full of water. 

Pataliputra had a municipality elected by the people. It had 
thirty members, divided up into six committees of five members 
each, dealing with industries and handicrafts, deaths and births, 
manufactures, arrangements for travellers and pilgrims, etc. The 
whole municipal council looked after finance, sanitation, water 
supply, public buildings, and gardens. 

Buddha's Teaching 

Behind these political and economic revolutions that were 
changing the face of India, there was the ferment of Buddhism 
and its impact on old-established faiths and its quarrels with vested 
interests in religion. Far more than the debates and arguments, 
of which India has always been so enamoured, the personality 
of a tremendous and radiant being had impressed the people and 
his memory was fresh in their minds. His message, old and yet 
very new and original for those immersed in metaphysical subtle- 
ties, captured the imagination of the intellectuals; it went deep 
down into the hearts of the people. 'Go unto all lands,' had said 
the Buddha to his disciples, 'and preach this gospel. Tell them that 

'Dr. F. W. Thomas, in 'The Cambridge History of India', Vol. I, p. 480. 



the poor and the lowly, the rich and the high, are all one, and that 
all castes unite in this religion as do the rivers in the sea.' His 
message was one of universal benevolence, of love for all. For 
'Never in this world does hatred cease by hatred; hatred 
ceases by love.' And 'Let a man overcome anger by kindness, 
evil by good.' 

It was an ideal of righteousness and self-discipline. 'One may 
overcome a thousand men in battle, but he who conquers him- 
self is the greatest victor.' 'Not by birth, but by his conduct alone, 
does a man become a low-caste or a Brahmin.' Even a sinner is 
not to be condemned, for 'who would willingly use hard speech 
to those who have done a sinful deed, strewing salt, as it were, 
upon the wound of their fault?' Victory itself over another leads 
to unhappy consequences — 'Victory breeds hatred, for the 
conquered is unhappy.' 

All this he preached without any religious sanction or any 
reference to God or another world. He relies on reason and logic 
and experience and asks people to seek the truth in their own 
minds. He is reported to have said: 'One must not accept my 
law from reverence, but first try it as gold is tried by fire.' 
Ignorance of truth was the cause of all misery. Whether there 
is a God or an Absolute or not, he does not say. He neither affirms 
nor denies. Where knowledge is not possible we must suspend 
judgment. In answer to a question, Buddha is reported to have 
said: 'If by the absolute is meant something out of relation to 
all known things, its existence cannot be established by any 
known reasoning. How can we know that anything unrelated to 
other things exists at all ? The whole universe, as we know it, is 
a system of relations: we know nothing that is, or can be, unrelat- 
ed.' So we must limit ourselves to what we can perceive and about 
which we can have definite knowledge. 

So also Buddha gives no clear answer about the existence of the 
soul. He does not deny it and he does not affirm it. He refuses to 
discuss this question, which is very remarkable, for the Indian mind 
of his day was full of the individual soul and the absolute soul, of 
monism and monotheism and other metaphysical hypotheses. 
But Buddha set his mind against all forms of metaphysics. He 
does, however, believe in the permanence of a natural law, of 
universal causation, of each successive state being determined by 
pre-existing conditions, of virtue and happiness and vice and 
suffering being organically related. 

We use terms and descriptions in this world of experience and 
say 'it is' or 'it is not.' Yet neither may be correct when we go 
behind the superficial aspect of things, and our language may be 
inadequate to describe what is actually happening. Truth may 
lie somewhere in the middle of 'is' and 'is not' or beyond them. 

128 



The river flows continuously and appears to be the same from 
moment to moment, yet the waters are ever changing. So also 
fire. The flame keeps glowing and even maintains its shape and 
form, yet it is never the same flame and it changes every instant. 
So everything continually changes and life in all its forms is a 
stream of becoming. Reality is not something that is permanent 
and unchanging, but rather a kind of radiant energy, a thing of 
forces and movements, a succession of sequences. The idea of 
time is just 'a notion abstracted by mere usage, from this or that 
event.' We cannot say that one thing is the cause of something 
else for there is no core of permanent being which changes. The 
essence of a thing is its immanent law of relation to other so-called 
things. Our bodies and our souls change from moment to moment; 
they cease to be, and something else, like them and yet different, 
appears and then passes off. In a sense we are dying all the time 
and being reborn and this succession gives the appearance of an 
unbroken identity. It is 'the continuity of an ever-changing ideatity.' 
Everything is flux, movement, change. 

All this is difficult for our minds to grasp, used as we are to 
set methods of thinking and of interpreting physical phenomena. 
Yet it is remarkable how near this philosophy of the Buddha 
brings us to some of the concepts of modern physics and modern 
philosophic thought. 

Buddha's method was one of psychological analysis and, again, 
it is surprising to find how deep was his insight into this latest of 
modern sciences. Man's life was considered and examined without 
any reference to a permanent self, for even if such a self exists, 
it is beyond our comprehension. The mind was looked upon as 
part of the body, a composite of mental forces. The individual 
thus becomes a bundle of mental states, the self is just a stream of 
ideas. 'All that we are is the result of what we have thought.' 

There is an emphasis on the pain and suffering of life, and the 
'Four Noble Truths' which Buddha enunciated deal with this 
suffering, its cause, the possibility of ending it, and the way to 
do it. Speaking to his disciples, he is reported to have said: 'and 
while ye experienced this (sorrow) through long ages, more tears 
have flowed from you and have been shed by you, while ye strayed 
and wandered on this pilgrimage (of life), and sorrowed and wept, 
because that was your portion which ye abhorred, and that which 
ye loved was not your portion, than all the water which is in the 
four great oceans.' 

Through an ending of this state of suffering is reached 'Nir- 
vana.' As to what Nirvana is, people differ, for it is impossible 
to describe a transcendental state in our inadequate language 
and in terms of the concepts of our limited minds. Some say it 
is just extinction, a blowing out. And yet Buddha is reported to 



have denied this and to have indicated that it was an intense 
kind of activity. It was the extinction of false desire, and not 
just annihilation, but it cannot be described by us except in 
negative terms. 

Buddha's way was the middle path, between the extremes of 
self-indulgence and self-mortification. From his own experience 
of mortification of the body, he said that a person who has lost 
his strength cannot progress along the right path. This middle 
path was the Aryan eightfold path: right beliefs, right aspira- 
tions, right speech, right conduct, right mode of livelihood, 
right effort, right-mindedness, and right rapture. It is all a ques- 
tion of self-development, not grace. And if a person succeeds 
in developing along these lines and conquers himself, there can 
be no defeat for him: 'Not even a god can change into defeat 
the victory of a man who has vanquished himself 

Buddha told his disciples what he thought they could under- 
stand and live up to. His teaching was not meant to be a full 
explanation of everything, a complete revelation of all that is. 
Once, it is said, he took some dry leaves in his hand and asked 
his favourite disciple, Ananda, to tell him whether there were 
any other leaves besides those in his hand. Ananda replied: 
'The leaves of autumn are falling on all sides, and there are 
more of them than can be numbered.' Then said the Buddha: 
'In like manner I have given you a handful of truths, but besides 
these there are many thousands of other truths, more than can 
be numbered.' 

The Buddha Story 

The Buddha story attracted me even in early boyhood, and I 
was drawn to the young Siddhartha who, after many inner 
struggles and pain and torment, was to develop into the Buddha. 
Edwin Arnold's 'Light of Asia' became one of my favourite 
books. In later years, when I travelled about a great deal in my 
province, I liked to visit the many places connected with the 
Buddha legend, sometimes making a detour for the purpose. 
Most of these places lie in my province or not far from it. Here 
(on the Nepal frontier) Buddha was born, here he wandered, 
here (at Gaya in Bihar) he sat under the Bodhi tree and gained 
enlightenment, here he preached his first sermon, here he died. 
When I visited countries where Buddhism is still a living and 
dominant faith, I went to see the temples and the monasteries 
and met monks and laymen, and tried to make out what 
Buddhism had done to the people. How had it influenced them, 
what impress had it left on their minds and faces, how did they 
react to modern life? There was much I did not like. The 



rational ethical doctrine had become overlaid with so much 
verbiage, so much ceremonial, canon law, so much, in spite of 
the Buddha, metaphysical doctrine and even magic. Despite Bud- 
dha's warning, they had deified him, and his huge images, in 
the temples and elsewhere, looked down upon me and I wonder- 
ed what he would have thought. Many of the monks were igno- 
rant persons, rather conceited and demanding obeisance, if not to 
themselves then to their vestments. In each country the national 
characteristics had imposed themselves on the religion and shap- 
ed it according to their distinctive customs and modes of life. 
Ml this was natural enough and perhaps an inevitable develop- 
ment. 

But I saw much also that I liked. There was an atmosphere 
of peaceful study and contemplation in some of the monasteries 
and the schools attached to them. There was a look of peace 
and calm on the faces of many of the monks, a dignity, a gentle- 
ness, an air of detachment and freedom from the cares of the 
world. Did all this accord with life to-day, or was it a mere escape 
from it? Could it not be fitted into life's ceaseless struggle and 
tone down the vulgarity and acquisitiveness and violence that 
afflict us? 

The pessimism of Buddhism did not fit in with my approach 
to life, nor did the tendency to walk away from life and its pro- 
blems. I was, somewhere at the back of my mind, a pagan with 
a pagan's liking for the exuberance of life and nature, and not 
very much averse to the conflicts that life provides. All that I had 
experienced, all that I saw around me, painful and distressing as 
it was, had not dulled that instinct. 

Was Buddhism passive and pessimistic? Its interpreters may 
say so; many of its own devotees may have drawn that meaning. 
I am not competent to judge of its subtleties and its subsequent 
complex and metaphysical development. But when I think of 
the Buddha no such feeling arises in me, nor can I imagine that 
a religion based mainly on passivity and pessimism could have 
had such a powerful hold on vast numbers of human beings, 
among them the most gifted of their kind. 

The conception of the Buddha, to which innumerable loving 
hands have given shape in carven stone and marble and bronze, 
seems to symbolize the whole spirit of Indian thought, or at 
least one vital aspect of it. Seated on the lotus flower, calm and 
impassive, above passion and desire, beyond the storm and strife 
of this world, so far away he seems, out of reach, unattainable. 
Yet again we look and behind those still, unmoving features 
there is a passion and an emotion, strange and more powerful 
than the passions and emotions we have known. His eyes are 
closed, but some power of the spirit looks out of them and a 



vital energy fills the frame. The ages roll by and Buddha seems 
not so far away after all; his voice whispers in our ears and tells 
us not to run away from the struggle but, calm-eyed, to face it, 
and to see in life ever greater opportunities for growth and 
advancement. 

Personality counts to-day as ever, and a person who has im- 
pressed himself on the thought of mankind as Buddha has, so 
that even to-day there is something living and vibrant about 
the thought of him, must have been a wonderful man — a man 
who was, as Barth says, the 'finished model of calm and sweet 
majesty, of infinite tenderness for all that breathes and com- 
passion for all that suffers, of perfect moral freedom and exemp- 
tion from every prejudice.' And the nation and the race which 
can produce such a magnificent type must have deep reserves of 
wisdom and inner strength. 

Ashoka 

The contacts between India and the western world which 
Chandragupta Maurya had established continued during the 
reign of his son, Bindusara. Ambassadors came to the court at 
Pataliputra from Ptolemy of Egypt and Antiochus, the son and 
successor of Seleucus Nikator of western Asia. Ashoka, grandson 
of Chandragupta, added to these contacts, and India became in 
his time an important international centre, chiefly because of 
the rapid spread of Buddhism. 

Ashoka succeeded to this great empire about 273 B.C. He had 
previously served as viceroy in the north-western province, of 
which Taxila, the university centre, was the capital. Already the 
empire included far the greater part of India and extended 
right into central Asia. Only the south-east and a part of the 
south were beyond its sway. The old dream of uniting the whole 
of India under one supreme government fired Ashoka and forth- 
with he undertook the conquest of Kalinga on the east coast, 
which corresponds roughly with modern Orissa and part of 
Andhra. His armies triumphed in spite of the brave and obsti- 
nate resistance of the people of Kalinga. There was a terrible 
slaughter in this war, and when news of this reached Ashoka he 
was stricken with remorse and disgusted with war. Unique 
among the victorious monarchs and captains in history, he 
decided to abandon warfare in the full tide of victory. The 
whole of India acknowledged his sway, except for the southern 
tip, and that tip was his for the taking. But he refrained from 
any further aggression, and his mind turned, under the influence 
of Buddha's gospel, to conquests and adventures in other fields. 

What Ashoka felt and how he acted are known to us in his 



own words in the numerous edicts he issued, carved in rock and 
metal. Those edicts, spread out all over India, are still with us, 
and they conveyed his messages not only to his people but to 
posterity. In one of the edicts it is said that: 

'Kalinga was conquered by His Sacred and Gracious Majesty 
when he had been consecrated eight years. One hundred and 
fifty thousand persons were thence carried away as captive, one 
hundred thousand were there slain, and many times that num- 
ber died. 

'Directly after the annexation of the Kalingas began His Sac- 
red Majesty's zealous protection of the Law of Piety, his love of 
that Law, and his inculcation of that Law (Dharma). Thus arose 
His Sacred Majesty's remorse for having conquered the Kalingas, 
because the conquest of a country previously unconquered invo- 
lves the slaughter, death, and carrying away captive of the peo- 
ple. That is a matter of profound sorrow and regret to His 
Sacred Majesty.' 

No longer, goes on the edict, would Ashoka tolerate any more 
killing or taking into captivity, not even of a hundredth or a 
thousandth part of the number killed and made captive in Kalinga. 
True conquest consists of the conquest of men's hearts by the 
law of duty or piety, and, adds Ashoka, such real victories had 
already been won by him, not only in his own dominions, but 
in distant kingdoms. 

The edict further says: 

'Moreover, should any one do him wrong, that too must be 
borne with by His Sacred Majesty, so far as it can possibly be 
borne with. Even upon the forest folk in his dominions His 
Sacred Majesty looks kindly and he seeks to make them think 
aright, for, if he did not, repentance would come upon His 
Sacred Majesty. For His Sacred Majesty desires that all animate 
beings should have security, self-control, peace of mind, and 
joyousness.' 

This astonishing ruler, beloved still in India and in many 
other parts of Asia, devoted himself to the spread of Buddha's 
teaching, to righteousness and goodwill, and to public works for 
the good of the people. He was no passive spectator of events, 
lost in contemplation and self-improvement. He laboured hard 
at public business and declared that he was always ready for it: 
'at all times and at all places, whether I am dining or in the 
ladies' apartments, in my bedroom or in my closet, in my carriage 
or in my palace gardens, the official reporters should keep me 

informed of the people's business At any hour and at any 

place work I must for the commonweal.' 

His messengers and ambassadors went to Syria, Egypt, Mace- 
donia, Cyrene, and Epirus, conveying his greeting and Buddha's 



message. They went to central Asia also and to Burma and 
Siam, and he sent his own son and daugher, Mahendra and 
Sanghamitra, to Ceylon in the south. Everywhere an appeal was 
made to the mind and the heart; there was no force or compul- 
sion. Ardent Buddhist as he was, he showed respect and consi- 
deration for all other faiths. He prcclaimed in an edict: 

'All sects deserve reverence for one reason or another. By thus 
acting a man exalts his own sect and at the same time does service 
to the sects of other people.' 

Buddhism spread rapidly in India from Kashmir to Ceylon. It 
penetrated into Nepal and later reached Tibet and China and 
Mongolia. In India, one of the consequences of this was the 
growth of vegetarianism and abstention from alcoholic drinks. 
Till then both Brahmins and Kshatriyas often ate meat and 
took wine. Animal sacrifice was forbidden. 

Because of the growth of foreign contacts and missionary 
enterprises, trade between India and other countries must have 
also grown. We have records of an Indian colony in Khotan 
(now Sinkiang, Central Asia). The Indian universities, especially 
Taxila, also attracted more students from abroad. 

Ashoka was a great builder and it has been suggested that he 
employed foreign craftsmen to assist in building some of his huge 
structures. This inference is drawn from the designs of some clus- 
tered columns which remind one of Persepolis. But even in those 
early sculptures and other remains the characteristically Indian 
art tradition is visible. 

Ashoka's famous many-pillared hall in his palace at Patali- 
putra was partly dug out by archaeologists about thirty years 
ago. Dr. Spooner, of the Archaeological Department of India, in 
his official report, said that this was 'in an almost incredible state 
of preservation, the logs which formed it being as smooth and 
perfect as the day they were laid, more than two thousand years 
ago.' He says further that the 'marvellous preservation of the 
ancient wood, whose edges were so perfect that the very lines 
of jointure were indistinguishable, evoked admiration of all who 
witnessed the experiment. The whole was built with a precision 

and reasoned care that could not possibly be excelled to-day 

In short, the construction was absolute perfection of such work. 

In other excavated buildings also in different parts of the country 
wooden logs and rafters have been found in an excellent state of 
preservation. This would be surprising anywhere, but in India 
it is more so, for the climate wears them away and all manner 
of insects eat them up. There must have been some special treat- 
ment of the wood; what this was is still, I believe, a mystery. 

Between Pataliputra (Patna) and Gaya lie the impressive re- 

134 



mains of Nalanda university, which was to become famous in 
later days. It is not clear when this began functioning and there 
are no records of it in Ashoka's time. 

Ashoka died in 232 B.C., after ruling strenuously for forty-one 
years. Of him H. G. Wells says in his 'Outline of History': 
'Amidst the tens of thousands of names of monarchs that crowd 
the columns of history, their majesties and graciousnesses and 
serenities and royal highnesses and the like, the name of Ashoka 
shines, and shines almost alone, a star. From the Volga to Japan 
his name is still honoured. China, Tibet, and even India, though 
it has left his doctrine, preserve the tradition of his greatness. 
More living men cherish his memory to-day than have ever heard 
the names of Constantine or Charlemagne.' 



CHAPTER FIVE 

THROUGH THE AGES 
Nationalism and Imperialism under the Guptas 



THE MAURYA EMPIRE FADED AWAY AND GAVE PLACE TO THE SUNGA 

dynasty, which ruled over a much smaller area. In the south 
great states were rising, and in the north the Bactrians, or Indo- 
Greeks, were spreading out from Kabul to the Punjab. Under 
Menander they threatened Pataliputra itself but were defeated 
and repelled. Menander himself succumbed to the spirit and atmos- 
phere of India and became a Buddhist, a famous one, known 
as King Milinda, popular in Buddhist legend and regarded 
almost as a saint. From the fusion of Indian and Greek cultures 
rose the Graeco-Buddhist art of Gandhara, the region covering 
Afghanistan and the frontier. 

There is a granite pillar called the Heliodorus column, dating 
from the first century B.C., at Besnagar, near Sanchi in Central 
India, bearing an inscription in Sanskrit. This gives us a glimpse 
of the process of Indianization of the Greeks who had come to 
the frontier, and their absorption of Indian culture. The in- 
scription has been translated thus: 'This Garuda column of 
Vasudeva (Vishnu), the God of gods, was erected by Heliodorus, 
a worshipper of Vishnu, the son of Dion, and an inhabitant of 
Taxila, who came as Greek ambassador from the great King 
Antialcidas to King Kashiputra Bhagabhadra, the saviour, then 
reigning in the fourteenth year of his kingship.' 

'Three immortal precepts, when practised well, lead to heaven 
— self-restraint, self-sacrifice (charity), conscientiousness.' 

In Central Asia the Shakas or Scythians (Seistan=Shakasthan) 
had established themselves in the Oxus Valley. The Yueh Chih, 
coming from further east, drove them out and pushed them into 
North India. These Shakas became converts to Buddhism and 
Hinduism. Among the Yueh Chih, one of the clans, the Kushans, 
established their supremacy and then extended their sway over 
Northern India. They defeated the Shakas and pushed them still 
further south, the Shakas going to Kathiawad and the Deccan. 
The Kushans thereupon established an extensive and durable 
empire over the whole of North India and a great part of Cen- 



tral Asia. Some of them became converts to the Hindu faith, 
but most of them became Buddhists, and their most famous 
king, Kanishka, is also one of the heroes of Buddhist legend, 
which records his great deeds and public works. Buddhist though 
he was, it appears that the state religion was a mixed affair to 
which even Zoroastrianism had contributed. This borderland 
state, called the Kushan Empire, with its seat near modern 
Peshawar, and the old university of Taxila near by, became the 
meeting place of men from many nations. There the Indians 
met the Scythians, the Yueh Chih, the Iranians, the Bactrian 
Greeks, the Turks, and the Chinese, and the various cultures 
reacted on each other. A vigorous school of sculpture and paint- 
ing arose as a result of their interactions. It was during this 
period that, historically, the first contacts took place between 
China and India, and a Chinese embassy came to India in 64 
A.C. Minor but very welcome gifts of China to India at that time 
were the peach and the pear trees. Right on the borders of the 
Gobi Desert, at Turfan and Kucha, rose fascinating amalgams 
of Indian, Chinese, and Iranian cultures. 

During the Kushan period a great schism divided Buddhism 
into two sections — the Mahayana and the Hinayana — and con- 
troversy raged between them and, as has been India's way, the 
issue was put to debate in great assemblies, to which representa- 
tives came from all over the country. Kashmir was situated near 
the centre of the empire and was full of this debate and of 
cultural activities. One name stands out in this controversy, that 
of Nagarjuna, who lived in the first century A.C. He was a tower- 
ing personality, great in Buddhist scholarship and Indian philo- 
sophy, and it was largely because of him that Mahayana trium- 
phed in India. It was the Mahayana doctrine that spread to 
China, while Ceylon and Burma adhered to Hinayana. 

The Kushans had Indianized themselves and had become 
patrons of Indian culture; yet an undercurrent of nationalist 
reistance to their rule continued, and when, later, fresh tribes 
poured into India, this nationalist and anti-foreign movement 
took shape at the beginning of the fourth century A.C. Another 
great ruler, also named Chandragupta, drove out the new 
intruders and established a powerful and widespread empire. 

Thus began the age of the imperial Guptas in 320 A.C. which 
produced a remarkable succession of great rulers, successful in 
war and in the arts of peace. Repeated invasions had produced 
a strong anti-foreign feeling and the old Brahmin-Kshatriya 
element in the country was forced to think in terms of defence 
both of their homeland and their culture. The foreign elements 
which had been absorbed were accepted, but all new-comers met 
with a vigorous resitance, and an attempt was made to build 

137 



up a homogenous state based on old Brahminic ideals. But the 
old self-assurance was going and these ideals began to develop a 
rigidity which was foreign to their nature. India seemed to draw 
into her shell, both physically and mentally. 

Yet that shell was deep enough and wide enough. Previously, 
in the ages since the Aryans had come down to what they called 
Aryavarta or Bharatvarsha, the problem that faced India was to 
produce a synthesis between this new race and culture and the 
old race and civilization of the land. To that the mind of India 
devoted itself and it produced an enduring solution built on the 
strong foundations of a joint Indo-Aryan culture. Other foreign 
elements came and were absorbed. They made little difference. 
Though India had many contacts with other countries through 
trade and otherwise, essentially she was absorbed in herself and 
paid little attention to what happened elsewhere. But now 
periodic invasion by strange peoples with strange customs had 
shaken her up and she could no longer ignore these eruptions, 
which not only broke up her political structure but endangered 
her cultural ideals and social structure also. The reaction was 
essentially a nationalist one, with the strength as well as the 
narrowness of nationalism. That mixture of religion and philo- 
sophy, history and tradition, custom and social structure, which 
in its wide fold included almost every aspect of the life of India, 
and which might be called Brahminism or (to use a later word) 
Hinduism, became the symbol of nationalism. It was indeed a 
national religion, with its appeal to all those deep instincts, 
racial and cultural, which form the basis everywhere of nation- 
alism to-day. Buddhism, child of Indian thought, had its nation- 
alist background also. India was to it the holy land where 
Buddha had lived and preached and died, where famous scholars 
and saints had spread the faith. But Buddhism was essentially 
international, a world religion, and as it developed and spread 
it became increasingly so. Thus it was natural for the old Brah- 
minic faith to become the symbol again and again of nationalist 
revivals. 

That faith and philosophy were tolerant and chivalrous to the 
various religions and racial elements in India, and they still 
continued to absorb them into their wide-flung structure, but 
they became increasingly aggressive to the outsider and sought 
to protect themselves against his impact. In doing so, the spirit 
of nationalism they had roused often took on the semblance of 
imperialism as it frequently dees when it grows in strength. 
The age of the Guptas, enlightened, vigorous, highly cultured, 
and full of vitality as it was, rapidly developed these imperia- 
listic tendencies. One of its great rulers, Samudragupta, has been 
called the Indian Napoleon. From a literary and artistic point of 

138 



view it was a brilliant. period. 

From early in the fourth century onwards for about a hundred 
and fifty years the Guptas ruled over a powerful and prosperous 
state in the north. For almost another century and a half their 
successors continued but they were on the defensive now and 
the empire shrank and became smaller and smaller. New inva- 
ders from Central Asia were pouring into India and attacking 
them. These were the White Huns, as they are called, who 
ravaged the land, as under Attila they were ravaging Europe. 
Their barbarous behaviour and fiendish cruelty at last roused 
the people, and a united attack by a confederacy under Yasho- 
varman was made on them. The Hun power was broken and 
their chief, Mihiragula, was made a prisoner. But the descen- 
dant of the Guptas, Baladitya, in accordance with his country's 
customs, treated him with generosity and allowed him to leave 
India. Mihiragula responded to this treatment by returning 
later and making a treacherous attack on his benefactor. 

But the Hun rule in Northern India was of brief duration — 
about half a century. Many of them remained, however, in the 
country as petty chiefs giving trouble occasionally and being 
absorbed into the sea of Indian humanity. Some of these chiefs 
became aggressive early in the seventh century A.C. They were 
crushed by the King of Kanauj, Harshavardhana, who thereafter 
built up a powerful state right across Northern and Central 
India. He was an ardent Buddhist but his Buddhism was of the 
Mahayana variety which was akin in many ways to Hinduism. 
He encouraged both Buddhism and Hinduism. It was in his 
time that the famous Chinese pilgrim Hsuan Tsang (or Yuan 
Chwang) came to India (in 629 A.C.). Harshavardhana was a 
poet and dramatist and he gathered round his court many artists 
and poets, making his capital Ujjayini, a famous centre of cul- 
tural activities. Harsha died in 648 A.C., just about the time 
when Islam was emerging from the deserts of Arabia, to spread 
out rapidly across Africa and Asia. 

South India 

In South India for more than 1,000 years after the Maurya 
Empire had shrunk and finally ceased to be, great states flouri- 
shed. The Andhras had defeated the Shakas and were later the 
contemporaries of the Kushans; then came the Chalukyan Em- 
pire in the west to be followed by the Rashtrakutas. Further 
south were the Pallavas who were mainly responsible for the 
colonizing expeditions from India. Later came the Chola Empire 
which spread right across the peninsula and conquered Ceylon 
and Southern Burma. The last great Chola ruler, Rajendra, 



died in 1044 A.C. 

Southern India was especially noted for its fine products and 
its trade by sea. They were sea-powers and their ships carried 
merchandise to distant countries. Colonies of Greeks lived there 
and Roman coins have also been found. The Chalukyan king- 
dom exchanged ambassadors with the Sassanid rulers of Persia. 

The repeated invasions of North India did not affect the 
South directly. Indirectly they led to many people from the north 
migrating to the south and these included builders and craftsmen 
and artisans. The south thus became a centre of the old artistic 
traditions while the north was more affected by new currents 
which the invaders brought with them. This process was acce- 
lerated in later centuries and the south became the stronghold of 
Hindu orthodoxy. 

Peaceful Development and Methods of Warfare 

A brief account of repeated "invasions and of empire succeeding 
empire is likely to convey a very wrong idea of what was taking 
place in India. It must be remembered that the period dealt 
with covers 1,000 years or more and the country enjoyed long 
stretches of peaceful and orderly government. 

The Mauryas, the Kushans, the Guptas, and, in the south, 
the Andhras, Chalukyas, Rashtrakutas and others, each lasted 
for two or three hundred years — longer, as a rule, than the 
British Empire has so far lasted in India. Nearly all these were 
indigenous dynasties and even those, like the Kushans, who 
came from across the northern border, soon adapted themselves 
to this country and its cultural traditions and functioned as 
Indian rulers with their roots in India. There were frontier 
forays and occasional conflicts between adjoining states, but the 
general conditions of the country was one of peaceful govern- 
ment, and the rulers took especial pride in encouraging artistic 
and cultural activities. These activities crossed state boundaries, 
for the cultural and literary background was the same through- 
out India. Every religious or philosophic controversy imme- 
diately spread and was debated all over the north and south. 

Even when there was war between two states, or there was 
an internal political revolution, there was relatively little inter- 
ference with the activities of the mass of the people. Records have 
been found of agreements between the warring rulers and the 
heads of village self-governing communities, promising not to 
injure the harvests in any way and to give compensation for any 
injury unintentionally caused to the land. This could not apply, 
of course, to invading armies from abroad, nor probably could 
it apply to any real struggle for power. 

140 



The old Indo-Aryan theory of warfare strictly laid down that 
no illegitimate methods were to be employed and a war for a 
righteous cause must be righteously conducted. How far the 
practice fitted in with the theory is another matter. The use of 
poisoned arrows was forbidden, so also concealed weapons, or 
the killing of those who were asleep or who came as fugitives or 
suppliants. It was declared that there should be no destruction 
of fine buildings. But this view was already undergoing a change 
in Chanakya's time and he approves of more destructive and 
deceptive methods, if these are considered essential for the defeat 
of the enemy. 

It is interesting to note that Chanakya in his Arthashastra, 
in discussing weapons of warfare, mentions machines which can 
destroy a hundred persons at one time and also some kind of 
explosives. He also refers to trench warfare. What all this meant 
it is not possible to say now. Probably the reference is to some 
traditional stories of magical exploits. There is no ground for 
thinking that gunpowder is meant. 

India has had many distressful periods in the course of her 
long history, when she was ravaged by fire and sword or by 
famine, and internal order collapsed. Yet a broad survey of this 
history appears to indicate that she had a far more peaceful and 
orderly existence for long periods of time at a stretch than Europe 
has had. And this applies also to the centuries following the 
Turkish and Afghan invasions, right up to the time when the 
Moghul Empire was breaking up. The notion that the Pax Britan- 
nica brought peace and order for the first time to India is 
one of the most extraordinary of delusions. It is true that when 
British rule was established in India the country was at her lowest 
ebb and there was a break-up of the political and economic 
structure. That indeed was one of the reasons why that rule was 
established. 

India's Urge to Freedom 

The East bowed low before the blast 

In patient, deep disdain; 
She let the legions thunder past, 
And plunged in thought again. 

So says the poet and his lines are often quoted. It is true that 
the east, or at any rate that part of it which is called India, has 
been enamoured of thinking, often of thinking about matters 
which to those who consider themselves practical men seem 
absurd and pointless. She has always honoured thought and the 
men of thought, the highbrows, and has refused to consider the 



men of the sword or the possessors of money as superior to them. 
Even in her days of degradation, she has clung to thought and 
found some comfort in it. 

But it is not true that India has ever bowed patiently before 
the blast or been indifferent to the passage of foreign legions. 
Always she has resisted them, often successfully, sometimes un- 
successfully, and even when she failed for the time being, she 
has remembered and prepared herself for the next attempt. Her 
method has been two-fold: to fight them and drive them out, 
and to absorb those who could not be driven away. She resisted, 
with considerable success, Alexander's legions, and immediately 
after his death drove out the Greek garrisons in the north. Later 
she absorbed the Indo-Greeks and the Indo-Scythians and 
ultimately again established a national hegemony. She fought 
the Huns for generations and drove them out; such as remained 
being absorbed. When the Arabs came they stopped near the 
Indus. The Turks and Afghans spread further only gradually. 
It took them several centuries to establish themselves firmly on 
the throne of Delhi. It was a continuous, long drawn-out conflict 
and, while this struggle was going on, the other process of absorp- 
tion and Indianization was also at work, ending in the invaders 
becoming as much Indian as anyone else. Akbar became the great 
representative of the old Indian ideal of a synthesis of differing 
elements and their fusion into a common nationality. He indentified 
himself with India, and India took to him although he was a 
newcomer; because of this he built well and laid the foundations 
of a splendid empire. So long as his successors kept in line with 
this policy and with the genius of the nation, their empire endured. 
When they broke away and opposed the whole drift of national 
development, they weakened and their empire went to pieces. 
New movements arose, narrow in outlook but representing a resur- 
gent nationalism, and though they were not strong enough to 
build permanently, they were capable of destroying the empire 
of the Moghuls. They were successful for a time, but they looked 
too much to the past and thought in terms of reviving it. They 
did not realize that much had happened which they could not 
ignore or pass by, that the past can never take the place of the 
present, that even that present in the India of their day was one 
of stagnation and decay. It had lost touch with the changing 
world and left India far behind. They did not appreciate that 
a new and vital world was arising in the west, based on a new 
outlook and on new techniques, and a new power, the British, 
represented that new world of which they were so ignorant. The 
British triumphed, but hardly had they established themselves in 
the north when the great mutiny broke out and developed with 
a war of independence, and nearly put an end to British rule. 



The urge to freedom, to independence, has always been there, and 
the refusal to submit to alien domination. 

Progress Versus Security 

We have been an exclusive people, proud of our past and of our 
heritage and trying to build walls and barriers to preserve it. 
Yet in spite of our race-consciousness and the growing rigidity 
of caste, we have, like others who take such pride in the purity 
of their racial stock, developed into a strange mixture of races 
— Aryan, Dravidian, Turanian, Semitic, and Mongolian. The 
Aryans came here in repeated waves and mixed with the Dra- 
vidians; they were followed in the course of thousands of years 
by successive waves of other migratory peoples and tribes: the 
Medians, Iranians, Greeks, Bactrians, Parthians, Shakas or 
Scythians, Kushans or the Yueh Chih, Turks, Turco-Mongols, 
and others who came in large or small groups and found a home 
in India. 'Fierce and warlike tribes,' says Dodwell in his 'India,' 
'again and again, invaded its (India's) northern plains, over- 
threw its princes, captured and laid waste its cities, set up new 
states and built new capitals of their own and then vanished into 
the great tide of humanity, leaving to their descendants nothing 
but a swiftly diluted strain of alien blood and a few shreds of alien 
custom that were soon transformed into something cognate with 
their overmastering surroundings.' 

To what were these overmastering surroundings due? Partly 
to the influence of geography and climate, to the very air of India. 
But much more so, surely, to some powerful impulse, some 
tremendous urge, or idea of the significance of life, that was 
impressed upon the subconscious mind of India when she was 
fresh and young at the very dawn of her history. That impress 
was strong enough to persist and to affect all those who came 
into contact with her, and thus to absorb them into her fold, 
howsoever they differed. Was this impulse, this idea, the vital 
spark that lighted up the civilization that grew up in this country 
and, in varying degrees, continued to influence its people through 
historical ages? 

It seems absurd and presumptuous to talk of an impulse, or 
an idea of life, underlying the growth of Indian civilization. 
Even the life of an individual draws sustenance from a hundred 
sources; much more complicated is the life of a nation or of a 
civilization. There are myriad ideas that float about like flotsam 
and jetsam on the surface of India, and many of them are 
mutually antagonistic. It is easy to pick out any group of them 
to justify a particular thesis; equally easy to choose another group 
to demolish it. This is, to some extent, possible everywhere; in 

143 



an old and big country like India, with so much of the dead cling- 
ing on to the living, it is peculiarly easy. There is also obvious 
danger in simple classifications of very complex phenomena. 
There are very seldom sharp contrasts in the evolution of practice 
and thought; each thought runs into another, and even ideas 
keeping their outer form change their inner contents; or they 
frequently lag behind a changing world and become a drag 
upon it. 

We have been changing continually throughout the ages and 
at no period were we the same as in the one preceding it. To-day, 
racially and culturally, we are very different from what we 
were; and all around me, in India as elsewhere, I see change march- 
ing ahead with a giant's stride. Yet I cannot get over the fact 
that Indian and Chinese civilizations have shown an extraordi- 
nary staying power and adaptability and, in spite of many chan- 
ges and crises, have succeeded, for an enormous span of years, 
in preserving their basic identity. They could not have done so 
unless they were in harmony with life and nature. Whatever it 
was that kept them to a large extent to their ancient moorings, 
whether it was good or bad or a mixture of the two, it was a thing 
of power or it could not have survived for so long. Possibly it ex- 
hausted its utility long ago and has been a drag and a hindrance 
ever since, or it may be that the accretions of later ages have 
smothered the good in it and only the empty shell of the fossil 
remains. 

There is perhaps a certain conflict always between the idea 
of progress and that of security and stability. The two do not 
fit in, the former wants change, the latter a safe unchanging 
haven and a continuation of things as they are. The idea of 
progress is modern and relatively new even in the west; the 
ancient and mediaeval civilizations thought far more in terms 
of a golden past and of subsequent decay. In India also the past 
has always been glorified. The civilization that was built up here 
was essentially based on stability and security, and from this 
point of view it was far more successful than any that arose in 
the west. The social structure, based on the caste system and 
joint families, served this purpose and was successful in providing 
social security for the group and a kind of insurance for the 
individual who by reason of age, infirmity, or any other incapacity, 
was unable to provide for himself. Such an arrangement, while 
favouring the weak, hinders; to some extent, the strong. It 
encourages the average type at the cost of the abnormal, the bad 
or the gifted. It levels up or down and individualism has less play 
in it. It is interesting to note that while Indian philosophy is 
highly individualistic and deals almost entirely with the individual's 
growth to some kind of inner perfection, the Indian social structure 

144 



was communal and paid attention to groups only. The individual 
was allowed perfect freedom to think and believe what he liked, 
but he had to conform strictly to social and communal usage. 
With all this conformity there was a great deal of flexibility 
also in the group as a whole and there was no law or social rule 
that could not change by custom. Also new groups could have 
their own customs, beliefs, and practices and yet be considered 
members of the larger social group. It was this flexibility and 
adaptability that helped in the absorption of foreign elements. 
Behind it all were some basic ethical doctrines and a philosophic 
approach to life and a tolerance of other people's ways. 

So long as stability and security were the chief ends in view, 
this structure functioned more or less successfully, and even 
when economic changes undermined it, there was a process of 
adaptation and it continued. The real challenge to it came from 
the new dynamic conception of social progress which could not 
be fitted into the old static ideas. It is this conception that is 
uprooting old-established systems in the east as it has done in 
the west. In the west while progress is still the dominant note, 
there is a growing demand for security. In India the very lack 
of security has forced people out of their old ruts and made them 
think in terms of a progress that will give more security. 

In ancient and mediaeval India, however, there was no such 
challenge of progress. But the necessity for change and con- 
tinuous adaptation was recognized and hence grew a passion 
for synthesis. It was a synthesis not only of the various elements 
that came into India but also an attempt at a synthesis between 
the outer and inner life of the individual, between man and 
nature. There were no such wide gaps and cleavages as seem to 
exist to-day. This common cultural background created India 
and gave it an impress of unity in spite of its diversity. At the 
root of the political structure was the self-governing village system, 
which endured at the base while kings came and went. Fresh 
migrations from outside and invaders merely ruffled the surface 
of this structure without touching those roots. The power of the 
state, however despotic in appearance, was curbed in a hundred 
ways by customary and constitutional restraints, and no ruler 
could easily interfere with the rights and privileges of the village 
community. These customary rights and privileges ensured a 
measure of freedom both for the community and the individual. 

Among the people of India to-day none are more typically 
Indian or prouder of Indian culture and tradition than the 
Rajputs. Their heroic deeds in the past have become a living 
part of that very tradition. Yet many of the Rajputs are said to 
be descended from the Indo-Scythians, and some even from the 
Huns who came to India. There is no sturdier or finer peasant 
in India than the Jat, wedded to the soil and brooking no 

145 



interference with his land. He also has a Scythian origin. And 
so too the Kathi, the tall, handsome peasant of Kathiawad. The 
racial origins of some of our people can be traced back with a 
certain definiteness, of others it is not possible to do so. But 
whatever the origin might have been, all of them have become 
distinctively Indian, participating jointly with others in India's 
culture and looking back on her past traditions as their own. 

It would seem that every outside element that has come to 
India and been absorbed by India, has given something to India 
and taken much from her; it has contributed to its own and to 
India's strength. But where it has kept apart, or been unable to 
become a sharer and participant in India's life, and her rich 
and diverse culture, it has had no lasting influence, and has 
ultimately faded away, sometimes injuring itself and India in 
the process. 

India and Iran 

Among the many peoples and races who have come in contact 
with and influenced India's life and culture, the oldest and most 
persistent have been the Iranians. Indeed the relationship pre- 
cedes even the beginnings of Indo-Aryan civilization, for it was 
out of some common stock, that the Indo-Aryans and the ancient 
Iranians diverged and took their different ways. Racially con- 
nected, their old religions and languages also had a common 
background. The Vedic religion had much in common with 
Zoroastrianism, and Vedic Sanskrit and the old Pahlavi, the 
language of the Avesta, closely resemble each other. Classical 
Sanskrit and Persian developed separately but many of their 
root-words were common, as some are common to all the Aryan 
languages. The two languages, and even more so their art and 
culture, were influenced by their respective environments. Persian 
art appears to be intimately connected with the soil and scenery 
of Iran, and to that probably is due the persistence of Iran's artistic 
tradition. So also the Indo-Aryan artistic tradition and ideals 
grew out of the snow-covered mountains, rich forests, and great 
rivers of north India. 

Iran, like India, was strong enough in her cultural founda- 
tions to influence even her invaders and often to absorb them. 
The Arabs, who conquered Iran in the seventh century A.A., 
soon succumbed to this influence and, in place of their simple 
desert ways, adopted the sophisticated culture of Iran. The 
Persian language, like French in Europe, became the language 
of cultured people across wide stretches of Asia. Iranian art and 
culture spread from Constantinople in the west right up to the 
edge of the Gobi Desert. 

In India this Iranian influence was continuous, and during 



the Afghan and Moghul periods in India, Persian was the court 
language of the country. This lasted right up to the beginning 
of the British period. All the modern Indian languages are full 
of Persian words. This was natural enough for the languages 
descended from the Sanskrit, and more especially for Hindus- 
tani, which itself is a mixed product, but even the Dravidian 
languages of the south have been influenced by Persian. India 
has produced in the past some brilliant poets in the Persian 
language, and even to-day there are many fine scholars of Per- 
sian, both Hindu and Moslem. 

There seems to be little doubt that the Indus Valley civiliza- 
tion had some contacts with the contemporaneous civilizations 
of Iran and Mesopotamia. There is a striking similarity between 
some of the designs and seals. There is also some evidence to 
show that there were contacts between Iran and India in the 
pre-Achaemian period. India is mentioned in the Avesta and 
there is also some kind of a description of north India in it. In the 
Rig Veda there are references to Persia — the Persians were called 
'Parshavas' and later 'Parasikas,' from which the modern word 
'Parsi' is derived. The Parthians were referred to as 'Parthavas.' 
Iran and north India were thus traditionally interested in each 
other from the most ancient times, prior to the Achaemian dynasty. 
With Cyrus the Great, king of kings, we have record of further 
contacts. Cyrus reached the borderlands of India, probably Kabul 
and Baluchistan. In the sixth century B.C. the Persian Empire 
under Darius stretched right up to north-west India, including 
Sind and probably part of western Punjab. That period is some- 
times referred to as the Zoroastrian period of Indian history and 
its influence must have been widespread. Sun worship was 
encouraged. 

The Indian province of Darius was the richest in his empire 
and the most populous. Sind then must have been very different 
from the desiccated desert land of recent times. Herodotus tells 
us of the wealth and density of the Indian population and of 
the tribute paid to Darius: 'The population of the Indians is 
by far the greatest of all the people that we know; and they paid 
tribute proportionately larger than all the rest — (the sum of) 
360 talents of gold dust' (equivalent to over a million pounds 
sterling). Herodotus also mentions the Indian contingent in the 
Persian armies consisting of infantry, cavalry, and chariots. 
Later, elephants are mentioned. 

From a period prior to the seventh century B.C., and for ages 
afterwards, there is some evidence of relations between Persia 
and India through trade, especially early commerce between 
India and Babylon, which it is believed, was largely via the 
Persian Gulf.* From the sixth century onwards direct contacts 

*Prof. A. V. Willaims Jackson, in 'The Cambridge History of India,' Vol I, p. 329. 



grew through the campaigns of Cyrus and Darius. After Alex- 
ander's conquest Iran was for many centuries under Greek rule. 
Contacts with India continued and Ashoka's buildings, it is said, 
were influenced by the architecture of Persepolis. The Graeco- 
Buddhist art that developed in north-west India and Afghanis- 
tan has also the touch of Iran. During the Gupta period in India, 
in the fourth and fifth centuries A.C., which is noted for its artistic 
and cultural activities, contacts with Iran continued. 

The borderland areas of Kabul, Kandahar, and Seistan, which 
were often politically parts of India, were the meeting place of 
Indians and Iranians. In later Parthian times they were called 
'White India.' Referring to these areas, the French savant, James 
Darmesteler, says: 'Hindu civilization prevailed in those parts, 
which in fact in the two centuries before and after Christ were 
known as White India, and remained more Indian than Iranian 
till the Mussulman conquest.' 

In the north, trade and travellers came overland to India. 
South India depended more on the sea and sea-borne trade con- 
nected it with other countries. There is record of an exchange 
of ambassadors between a southern kingdom and the Persia of 
the Sassanids. 

The Turkish, Afghan, and Moghul conquests of India resulted 
in a rapid development of India's contacts with central and 
western Asia. In the fifteenth century (just about the time of 
the European Renaissance') the Timurid Renaissance was flower- 
ing in Samarkand and Bokhara, powerfully influenced by Iran. 
Babar, himself a prince of the Timurid line, came out of this 
milieu and established himself on the throne of Delhi. That was 
early in the sixteenth century when Iran was having, under the 
Safavis, a brilliant artistic revival — a period known as the golden 
age of Persian art. It was to the Safavi king that Babar's son, 
Humayun, went for refuge, and it was with his help that he 
came back to India. The Moghul rulers of India kept up the 
closest of contacts with Iran and there was a stream of scholars 
and artists coming over the frontier to seek fame and fortune 
at the brilliant court of the Great Moghul. 

A new architecture developed in India, a combination of 
Indian ideals and Persian inspiration, and Delhi and Agra were 
covered with noble and beautiful bui'ldings. Of the most famous 
of these, the Taj Mahal, M. Grousset, the French savant, said 
that it is 'the soul of Iran incarnate in the body of India.' 

Few people have been more closely related in origin and 
throughout history than the people of India and the people of 
Iran. Unfortunately the last memory we have of this long, inti- 
mate and honourable association is that of Nadir Shah's inva- 
sion, a brief but terrible visitation two hundred years ago. 



Then came the British and they barred all the doors and 
stopped all the routes that connected us with our neighbours 
in Asia. New routes were opened across the seas which brought 
us nearer to Europe, and more particularly England, but there 
were to be no further contacts overland between India and Iran 
and central Asia and China till, in the present age, the develop- 
ment of the airways made us renew the old companionship. 
This sudden isolation from the rest of Asia has been one of the 
most remarkable and unfortunate consequences of British rule 
in India.* 

There has, however, been one continuing bond, not with Iran 
of modern times but with old Iran. Thirteen hundred years ago, 
when Islam came to Iran, some hundreds or thousands of the 
followers of the old Zoroastrian faith migrated to India. They 
found a welcome here and settled down on the western coast, 
following their faith and customs without being interferred with 
and without interfering with others. It is remarkable how the 
Parsis, as they have been called, have quietly and unostenta- 
tiously fitted into India, made it their home, and yet kept quite 
apart as a small community, tenaciously holding on to their 
old customs. Intermarriage outside the fold of the community 
was not allowed and there have been very few instances of it. 
This in itself did not occasion any surprise in India, as it was 
usual here for people to marry within their own caste. Their 
growth in numbers has been very slow and even now their total 
number is about one hundred thousand. They have prospered 
in business and many of them are the leaders of industry in 
India. They have had practically no contacts with Iran and are 
completely Indian, and yet they hold on to their old traditions 
and the memories of their ancient homeland. 

In Iran there has recently been a strong tendency to look 
back to the old civilization of pre-Islamic days. This has nothing 
to do with religion; it is cultural and nationalistic, seeking and 
taking pride in the long and persistent cultural tradition of Iran. 

World developments and common interests are forcing Asiatic 
countries to look at each other again. The period of European 
domination is passed over as a bad dream and memories of long 
ago remind them of old friendships and common adventures. 

*Prof. E. J. Rapson writes : ' The power which has succeeded in welding all the subordinate 
ruling powers into one great system of government is essentially naval; and since it controls 
the sea-ways, it has been forced in the interests of security, to close the land-ways. This has 
been the object of British policy in regard to the countries which lie on the frontiers of the 
Indian Empire — Afghanistan, Baluchistan, and Burma. Political isolation has thus follow- 
ed as a necessary consequence of political unity. But it must be remembered that this political 
isolation is a recent and an entirely novelfeature in the history of India. It is the great land- 
mark which separates the present from the past. ' ('The Cambridge History of India, ' Vol. 
I, p. 52.) 



There can be no doubt that in the near future India will draw 
closer to Iran, as she is doing to China. 

Two months ago the leader of an Iranian Cultural Mission 
to India said in the city of Allahadabad. 'The Iranians and 
Indians are like two brothers, who, according to a Persian legend, 
had got separated from each other, one going east and the other 
to the west. Their families had forgotten all about each other 
and the only thing that remained in common between them 
were the snatches of a few old tunes which they still played on 
their flutes. It was through these tunes that, after a lapse of 
centuries, the two families recognized each other and were reunited. 
So also we come to India to play on our flutes our age-old songs, 
so thai, hearing them, our Indian cousins may recognize us as 
their own and become reunited with their Iranian cousins.' 

India and Greece 

Ancient Greece is supposed to be the fountain-head of European 
civilization and much has been written about the fundamental 
difference between the Orient and the Occident. I do not under- 
stand this; a great deal of it seems to me to be vague and 
unscientific, without much basis in fact. Till recently many 
European thinkers imagined that everything that was worth- 
while had its origin in Greece or Rome. Sir Henry Maine has 
said somewhere that except the blind forces of nature, nothing 
moves in this world which is not originally Greek. European 
classical scholars, deeply learned in Greek and Latin lore, knew 
very little about India and China. Yet Professor E. R. Dodds 
emphasizes the 'Oriental background against which Greek cul- 
ture ro e, and from which it was never completely isolated save 
in the minds of classical scholars.' 

Scholarship in Europe was necessarily limited for a long time 
to Greek, Hebrew, and Latin, and the picture of the world that 
grew out of it was of the Mediterranean world. The basic idea 
was not essentially different from that of the old Romans, though 
inevitably many changes and adaptations had to be made to it. 
That idea not only governed the conceptions of history and 
geopolitics and the development of culture and civilization, but 
also came in the way of scientific progress. Plato and Aristotle 
dominated the mind. Even when some knowledge of what the 
peoples of Asia had done in the past soaked into the European 
mind, it was not willingly accepted. There was an unconscious 
resistance to it, an attempt to fit it somehow into the previous 
picture. If scholars believed so, much more so did the unread 
crowd believe in some essential difference between the east and 
the west. The industrialization of Europe and the consequent 



material progress impressed this difference still further on the 
popular mind, and by an odd process of rationalization ancient 
Greece became the father or mother of modern Europe and 
America. Additional knowledge of the past of the world shook 
these conclusions in the minds of a few thinkers, but so far as 
the mass of the people were concerned, intellectuals and non- 
intellectuals, the centuries-old ideas continued, phantoms float- 
ing about in the upper layer of their consciousness and fading 
away into the landscape they had fashioned for themselves. 

I do not understand the use of the words Orient and Occi- 
dent, except in the sense that Europe and America are highly 
industrialized and Asia is backward in this respect. This indus- 
trialization is something new in the world's history, and it has 
changed and continues to change the world more than anything 
else has done. There is no organic connection between Hellenic 
civilization and modern European and American civilization. 
The modern notion that the really important thing is to be 
comfortable is entirely foreign to the ideas underlying Greek 
or any other ancient literature. Greeks and Indians and Chinese 
and Iranians were always seeking a religion and a philosophy 
of life which affected all their activities and which were intended 
to produce an equilibrium and a sense of harmony. This ideal 
emerges in every aspect of life — in literature, art, and institu- 
tions — and it produces a sense of proportion and completeness. 
Probably these impressions are not wholly justified and the 
actual conditions of life may have been very different. But even 
so, it is important to remember how far removed are modern 
Europe and America from the whole approach and outlook of 
the Greeks, whom they praise so much in their leisure moments, 
and with whom they seek some distant contacts, in order to 
satisfy some inner yearning of their hearts, or find some oasis 
in the harsh and fiery deserts of modern existence. 

Every country and people in the East and the West has had 
an individuality, a message, and has attempted to solve life's 
problems each in its own way. Greece is something definite, 
superb in its own way; so is India, so is China, so is Iran. Ancient 
India and ancient Greece were different from each other and 
yet they were akin, just as ancient India and ancient China had 
kinship in thought, in spite of great differences. They all had 
the same broad, tolerant, pagan outlook, joy in life and in the 
surprising beauty and infinite variety of nature, love of art, and 
the wisdom that comes from the accumulated experience of 
an old race. Each of them developed in accordance with 
its racial genius, influenced by its natural environment, and 
emphasized some one aspect of life more than others. This em- 
phasis varied. The Greeks, as a race, may have lived more in 



the present and found joy and harmony in the beauty they saw 
around them or which they themselves created. The Indians 
found this joy and harmony also in the present, but, at the same 
time, their eyes were turned towards deeper knowledge and their 
minds trafficked with strange questions. The Chinese, fully 
aware of these questions and their mystery, in their wisdom 
avoided entanglement with them. In their different ways each 
tried to express the fullness and beauty of life. History has shown 
that India and China had stronger foundations and greater 
staying power; they have thus far survived, though they have 
been badly shaken and have greatly deteriorated, and the future 
is obscure. 

Old Greece, for all its brilliance, had a short life; it did not 
survive except in its splendid achievements, its influence on succeed- 
ing cultures, and the memory of that short bright day of abundant 
life. Perhaps because it was too much engrossed in the present, 
it became the past. 

India is far nearer in spirit and outlook to the old Greece than 
the nations of Europe are to-day, although they call themselves 
children of the Hellenic spirit. We are apt to forget this because 
we have inherited fixed concepts which prevent reasoned thought. 
India, it is said, is religious, philosophical, speculative, metaphysical, 
unconcerned with this world, and lost in dreams of the beyond 
and the hereafter. So we are told, and perhaps those who tell us 
so would like India to remain plunged in thought and entangled 
in speculation, so that they might possess this world and the fullness 
thereof, unhindred by these thinkers, and take their joy of it. Yes, 
India has been all this but also much more than this. She has 
known the innocence and insouciance of childhood, the passion 
and abandon of youth, and the ripe wisdom of maturity that 
comes from long experience of pain and pleasure; and over and 
over again she has renewed her childhood and youth and age. 
The tremendous inertia of age and size have weighed her down, 
degrading custom and evil practice have eaten into her, many a 
parasite has clung to her and sucked her blood, but behind all 
this lie the strength of ages and the sub-conscious wisdom of an 
ancient race. For we are very old, and trackless centuries whisper 
in our ears; yet we have known how to regain our youth again and 
again, though the memory and dreams of those past ages endure 
with us. 

It is not some secret doctrine or esoteric knowledge that has 
kept India vital and going through these long ages, but a tender 
humanity, a varied and tolerant culture, and a deep under- 
standing of life and its mysterious ways. Her abundant vitality 
flows out from age to age in her magnificent literature and art, 
though we have only a small part of this with us and much lies 

152 



hidden still or has been destroyed by nature or man's vandalism. 
The Trimurti, in the Elephanta caves, might well be the many- 
faced statue of India herself, powerful, with compelling eyes, 
full of deep knowledge and understanding, looking down upon 
us. The Ajanta frescoes are full of a tenderness and love ofbeauty 
and life, and yet always with a suspicion of something deeper, 
something beyond. 

Geographically and climatically Greece is different from India. 
There are no real rivers there, no forests, no big trees, which 
abound in India. The sea with its immensity and changing 
moods affected the Greeks far more than it did the Indians, 
except perhaps those who lived near India's coastline. India's 
life was more continental, of vast plains and huge mountains, 
of mighty rivers and great forests. There were some mountains 
in Greece also, and the Greeks chose Olympus as the abode of 
the gods, just as the Indians placed their gods and even their 
sages on the Himalayan heights. Both developed a mythology 
which was indivisibly mixed up with history, and it was not 
possible to separate fact from fiction. The old Greeks are said 
to have been neither pleasure-seekers nor ascetics; they did not 
avoid pleasure as something evil and immoral, nor did they go 
out deliberately to amuse themselves as modern people are apt 
to do. Without the inhibitions which afflict so many of us, they 
took life in their stride, applying themselves wholly to whatever 
they did, and thus somehow they appear to have been more 
alive than we are. Some such impression one gathers of life in 
India also from our old literature. There was an ascetic aspect 
of life in India, as there was later in Greece, but it was confined 
to a limited number of people and did not affect life generally. 
That aspect was to grow more important under the influence 
of Jainism and Buddhism, but even so it did not change materi- 
ally the background of life. 

Life was accepted as it was and lived fully both in India and 
Greece; nevertheless, there was a belief in the supremacy of some 
kind of inner life. This led to curiosity and speculation, but the 
spirit of inquiry was not so much directed towards objective 
experience as to logical reasoning fixed on certain concepts 
which were accepted as obviously true. That indeed was the 
general attitude everywhere before the advent of the scientific 
method. Probably this speculation was confined to a small 
number of intellectuals, yet even the ordinary citizens were 
influenced by it and discussed philosophical problems, as they 
did everything else, in their public meeting places. Life was 
communal, as it is even now in India, especially in the rural 
areas, where people meet in the market place, in the enclosure 
of the temple or mosque, at the well-head, or at the panchayat 

153 



ghar or common assembly house, where such exists, to discuss 
the news of the day and their common needs. Thus public 
opinion was formed and found expression. There was plenty 
of leisure for these discussions. 

And yet Hellenism has among its many splendid achieve- 
ments one that is even more unique than others, the early beginn- 
ings of experimental science. This was developed far more in 
the Hellenic world of Alexandria than in Greece itself, and the 
two centuries from 330 to 130 B.C. stand out in the record of 
scientific development and mechanical invention. There is nothing 
to compare with this in India, or, for the matter of that, anywhere 
else till science again took a big stride from the seventeenth century 
onwards. Even Rome for all its empire and the Pax Romana over 
a considerable area, its close contacts with Hellenic civilization, its 
opportunities to draw upon the learning and experiences of many 
peoples, made no significant contribution to science, invention, 
or mechanical development. After the collapse of classical civiliza- 
tion in Europe it was the Arabs who kept the flame of scientific 
knowledge alight through the Middle Ages. 

This burst of scientific activity and invention in Alexandria 
was no doubt the social product of the time, called forth by the 
needs of a growing society and of seafaring, just as the advance in 
arithmetic and algebraic methods, the use of the zero sign and 
the place-value system in India were also due to social needs, 
advancing trade and more complex organization. But it is doubtful 
how far the scientific spirit was present in the old Greeks as a 
whole and their life must have followed traditional patterns, 
based on their old philosophic approach seeking an integration 
and harmony in man and with nature. It is that approach which 
is common to old Greece and India. In Greece, as in India, the 
year was divided up by popular festivals which heralded the 
changing seasons and kept man in tune with nature's moods. We 
have still these festivals in India for spring and harvest-time and 
deepavali, the festival of light at the end of autumn, and the holi 
carnival in early summer, and celebrations of the heroes of epic 
tradition. There is still singing and dancing at some of these 
festivals, folk-songs and folk-dances like the rasa-lila, the dance of 
Krishna with the gopis (cowherdesses). 

There is no seclusion of women in ancient India except to 
some extent among royalty and the nobility. Probably there was 
more segregation of the sexes in Greece than in India then. Women 
of note and learning are frequently mentioned in the old Indian 
books, and often they took part in public debates. Marriage, in 
Greece, was apparently wholly a contractual affair; but in India 
it has always been considered a sacramental union, though other 
forms are mentioned. 



Greek women were apparently especially welcome in India. 
Often the maids-in-waiting at royal courts mentioned in the 
old plays are Greek. Among the noted imports from Greece into 
India at the port of Barygaza (Broach in Western India) were, 
it is said, 'singing boys and pretty maidens.' Megasthenes des- 
cribing the life of the Maurya king Chandragupta, tells us: 'the 
king's food was prepared by women who also served him with 
wine which is much used by all Indians.' Some of the wine 
certainly came from Grecian lands or colonies, for an old Tamil- 
poet refers to 'the cool and fragrant wine brought by the Yavanas 
(Ionians or Greeks) in their good ships.' A Greek account relates 
that the king of Pataliputra (probably Ashoka's father, Bindusara) 
wrote to Antiochus asking him to buy and send him sweet wine, 
dried figs, and a Sophist philosopher. Antiochus replied: 'We 
shall send you the figs and wine, but in Greece the laws forbid a 
Sophist to be sold.' 

It is clear from Greek literature that homosexual relations 
were not looked upon with disfavour. Indeed there was a romantic 
approval of them. Possibly this was due to the segregation of the 
sexes in youth. A similar attitude is found in Iran, and Persian 
literature is full of such references. It appears to have become an 
established literary form and convention to represent the beloved 
as a male companion. There is no such thing in Sanskrit literature 
and homosexuality was evidently neither approved nor at all 
common in India. 

Greece and India were in contact with each other from the 
earliest recorded times, and in a later period there were close 
contacts between India and Hellenized western Asia. The great 
astronomical observatory at Ujjayini (now Ujjain) in central 
India was linked with Alexandria in Egypt. During this long 
period of contact there must have been many exchanges in the 
world of thought and culture between these two ancient civili- 
zations. There is a tradition recorded in some Greek book that 
learned Indians visited Socrates and put questions to him. 
Pythagoras was particularly influenced by Indian philosophy 
and Professor H. G. Rawlinson remarks that 'almost all the 
theories, religious, philosophical, and mathematical, taught by 
the Pythagorians were known in India in the sixth century B.C.' 
A European classical scholar, Urwick, has based his interpreta- 
tion of the 'Republic' of Plato upon Indian thought.* Gnosti- 
cism is supposed to be a definite attempt to fuse together Greek 
Platonic and Indian elements. The philosopher, Apollonius of 
Tyana probably visited the university of Taxila in north-west 
India about the beginning of the Christian era. 

*Zimmern in his 'The Green Commonwealth 1 refers to Urwick's book. 'The Message of 
Plato' (1920). I have not seen this book. 



The famous traveller and scholar, Alberuni, a Persian born in 
Khorasan in Central Asia, came to India in the eleventh cen- 
tury A.C. He had already studied Greek philosophy which was 
popular in the early days of Islam in Baghdad. In India he took 
the trouble to learn Sanskrit in order to study Indian philo- 
sophy. He was struck by many common features and he has 
compared the two in his book on India. He refers to Sanskrit 
books dealing with Greek astronomy and Roman astronomy. 

Though inevitably influencing each other Greek and Indian 
civilizations were each strong enough to hold their own and 
develop on their distinctive lines. In recent years there has been 
a reaction from the old tendency to ascribe everything to Greece 
and Rome, and Asia's, and especially India's role has been 
emphasized. 'Considered broadly,' says Professor Tarn, 'what 
the Asiatic took from Greek was usually externals only, matters 
of form; he rarely took the substance — civic institutions may 
have been an exception — and never spirit. For in matters of 
spirit Asia was quite confident that she could outstay the Greeks, 
and she did.' Again: 'Indian civilization was strong enough to 
hold its own against Greek civilization, but except in the religi- 
ous sphere, was seemingly not strong enough to influence it as 
Babylonia did; nevertheless, we may find reason for thinking 
that in certain respects India was the dominant partner.' 'Ex- 
cept for the Buddha statue the history of India would in all 
essentials have been precisely what it has been had the Greeks 
never existed.' 

It is an interesting thought that image worship came to India 
from Greece. The Vedic religion was opposed to all forms of 
idol and image worship. There were not even any temples for 
the gods. There probably were some traces of image worship 
in the older faiths in India, though this was certainly not widely 
prevalent. Early Buddhism was strongly opposed to it and there 
was a special prohibition against the making of images and 
statues of the Buddha. But Greek artistic influence in Afghani- 
stan and round about the frontier was strong and gradually it 
had its way. Even so, no statues of the Buddha were made to 
begin with, but Apollo — rlike staues of the Bodhisattvas (sup- 
posed to be the previous incarnations of the Buddha) appeared. 
These were followed by statues and images of the Buddha 
himself. This encouraged image-worship in some forms of 
Hinduism though not in the Vedic religion which continued 
to be free of it. The word for an image or statue in Persian and 
in Hindustani still is But (like put) derived from Buddha. 

The human mind appears to have a passion for finding out 
some kind of unity in life, in nature and the universe. That 
desire, whether it is justified or not, must fulfil some essential 



need of the mind. The old philosophers were ever seeking this, 
and even modern scientists are impelled by this urge. All our 
schemes and planning, our ideas of education and social and 
political organization, have at their back the search for unity 
and harmony. 

We are told now by some able thinkers and philosophers that 
this basic conception is false and there is no such thing as order or 
unity in this accidental universe. That may be so, but there can 
be little doubt that even this mistaken belief, if such it was, and 
the search for unity in India, Greece, and elsewhere, yielded positive 
results and produced a harmony, a balance, and a richness in life. 

The Old Indian Theatre 

The discovery by Europe of the old Indian drama led imme- 
diately to suggestions that it had its origin in, or had been greatly 
influenced by, Greek drama. There was some plausibility in the 
theory, for till then no other ancient drama had been known to 
exist, and after Alexander's raid Hellenized states were esta- 
blished on the frontiers of India. These states continued to function 
for several centuries and Greek theatrical representations must 
have been known there. This question was closely scrutinized and 
debated by European scholars throughout the nineteenth century. 
It is now generally admitted that the Indian theatre was entirely 
independent in its origins, in the ideas which governed it, and 
in its development. Its earliest beginnings can be traced back to the 
hymns and dialogues of the Rig Veda which have a certain dra- 
matic character. There are references to Nataka or the drama 
in the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. It began to take shape 
in the song and music and dances of the Krishna legends. Panini, 
the great grammarian of the sixth or seventh century B.C., men- 
tions some dramatic forms. 

A treatise on the Art of the Theatre — the Natya-Shftstra — is 
said to date from the third century A.C. but this was evidently 
based or previous books on the subject. Such a book could only 
be written when the dramatic art was fully developed and pub- 
lic representations were common. A considerable literature must 
have preceded it, and behind it must lie many centuries of 
gradual progress. Recently an ancient playhouse, dating from 
the second century B.C., has been unearthed in the Ramgarh 
Hills in Chota Nagpur. It is significant that this playhouse fits 
in with the general description of theatres given in the Natya- 
Shastra. 

It is now believed that the regular Sanskrit drama was fully 
established by the third century B.C., though some scholars take 
the date back to the fifth century. In the plays that we have, 



mention is often made of earlier authors and plays which have 
not so far been found. One such lost author was Bhasa, highly 
praised by many subsequent dramatists. Early in this century 
a bunch of thirteen of his plays was discovered. Probably the 
earliest Sanskrit plays so far discovered, are those of Ashvaghosa, 
who lived just before or after the beginning of the Christian 
era. These are really fragments only of manuscripts on palm 
leaves, and they were discovered, strangely enough, at Turfan 
on the borders of the Gobi desert. Ashvaghosa was a pious 
Buddhist and wrote also the Buddha Charita, a life of the Buddha, 
which was well known and had long been popular in India 
and China and Tibet. The Chinese translation, made in a past 
age, was by an Indian scholar. 

These discoveries have given a new perspective to the history 
of the old Indian drama and it may be that further discoveries 
and finds will throw more light on this fascinating development 
of Indian culture. For, as Sylvain Levi has written in his 'Le 
Theatre Indien': 'Le theatre est la plus haute expression de la 
civilisation qui l'enfante. Qu'il traduise ou qu'il interprete la 
vie reelle, il est tenu de la resumer sous une forme frappante, 
ddgagee des accessoires insignificants, generalisee dans un symbole. 
L'originalite de l'Inde s'est exprimee tout entire dans son art 
dramatique; elle y a combine et condense ses dogmes, ses doct- 
rines, ses institutions ' 

Europe first learned of the old Indian drama from Sir Wil- 
liam Jones's translation of Kalidasa's 'Shakuntala', published 
in 1789. Something in the nature of a commotion was created 
among European intellectuals by this discovery and several edi- 
tions of the book followed. Translations also appeared (made 
from Sir William Jones's translation) in German, French, Danish, 
and Italian. Goethe was powerfully impressed and he paid a 
magnificent tribute to 'Shakuntala'. The idea of giving a pro- 
logue to Faust is said to have originated from Kalidasa's pro- 
logue, which was in accordance with the usual tradition of the 
Sanskrit drama.* 

* There is a tendency on the part of Indian writers, to which 1 have also partly succumbed, to 
give selected extracts and quotations from the writings qf European scholars in praise of old 
Indian literature and philosophy. It would be equally easy, and indeed much easier, to give 
other extracts giving an exactly opposite viewpoint. The discovery by the European scho- 
lars of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries of Indian thought and philosophy led to an 
outburst of admiration and enthusiasm. There was a feeling that these filled a need, some- 
thing that European culture had been unable to do. Then there was a reaction away from 
this attitude and criticism and scepticism grew. This was caused by a feeling that the philo- 
sophy was formless and diffuse and a dislike of the rigid caste structure of Indian society. 
Both these reactions in favour and against, were based on very incomplete knowledge of old 
Indian literature. Goethe himself moved from one opinion to the other, and while he acknow- 
ledged the tremendous stimulus of Indian thought on western civilization, he refused to submit 
to its far reaching influence. This dual and conflicting approach has been characteristic of 



Kalidasa is acknowledged to be the greatest poet and dra- 
matist of Sanskrit literature. 'Le nom de Kalidasa,' says Professor 
Sylvain Levi, 'domine la po6sie indienne et la resume brillam- 
ment. Le drame, l'epopee savante. l'elegie attestent aujourd'hui 
encore la puissance et la souplesse de ce magnifique g6nie; seul 
entre les disciples de Sarasvati (the goddess of learning and 
the arts), il a eu le bonheur de produire un chef doe'uvre 
vraiment classique, oil l'lnde s'admire et ou l'humanitd se re- 
connait. Les applaudissements qui saluferent la naissance de 
Gakuntala k Ujjayini ont apr£s de long siecles delate d'un 
bout du monde a l'autre, quand William Jones l'eut revels k 
l'Occident. Kalidasa a marque sa place dans cette pleiade 
entincelante ou chaque nom resume une periode de l'esprit 
humain. La serie de ces noms forme l'histoire, ou plutot elle 
est l'histoire meme.' 

KalidSsa wrote other plays also and some long poems. His 
date is uncertain but very probably he lived towards the end 
of the fourth century A.c. at Ujjayini during the reign of 
Ghandragupta II, Vikramaditya of the Gupta dynasty. Tradi- 
tion says that he was one of the nine gems of the court, and there 
is no doubt that his genius was appreciated and he met with 
full recognition during his life. He was among the fortunate whom 
life treated as a cherished son and who experienced its beauty 
and tenderness more than its harsh and rough edges. His 
writings betray this love of life and a passion for nature's beauty. 

One of Kalidasa's long poems is the Meghaduta, the Cloud 
Messenger. A lover, made captive and separated from his beloved, 
asks a cloud, during the rainy season, to carry his message of 
desperate longing to her. To this poem and to Kalidasa, the 
American scholar, Ryder, has paid a splendid tribute. He refers 
to the two parts of the poem and says: 'The former half is a 
description of external nature, yet interwoven with human feel- 
ing; the latter half is a picture of a human heart, yet the picture 
is framed in natural beauty. So exquisitely is the thing done that 
none can say which half is superior. Of those who read this 
perfect poem in the original text, some are moved by the one, 
some by the other. Kalidasa understood in the fifth century 
what Europe did not learn until the nineteenth, and even now 
comprehends only imperfectly, that the world was not made for 
man, that man reaches his full stature only as he realizes the 
dignity and worth of life that is not human. That Kalidasa seized 

the European mind in regard to India. In recent years that great European and typical 
product of the best European culture, Romain Rolland, made a more synthetic and very 
friendly approach to the basic foundations of Indian tought: For him East and West 

represented different phases of the eternal struggle of the human soul. On this subject — 
Western reaction to Indian thought — Mr. Alex Aronson, of Santiniketan University, has 

written with learning and ability. 



this truth is a magnificent tribute to his intellectual power, a 
quality quite as necessary to great poetry as perfection of form. 
Poetical fluency is not rare; intellectual grasp is not very un- 
common; but the combination of the two has not been found 
perhaps more than a dozen times since the world began. Be- 
cause he possessed this harmonious combination, Kalidasa ranks 
not with Anacreon and Horace and Shelley, but with Sophocles, 
Virgil, and Milton.' 

Probably long before Kalidasa, another famous play was pro- 
duced — Shudraka's 'Mrichhkatika' or the Clay Cart, a tender 
rather artificial play, and yet with a reality which moves us and 
gives us a glimpse into the mind and civilization of the day. 

About 400 A.C., also during the reign of Chandragupta II, 
yet another notable play was produced, Vishaka-datta's 'Mudra- 
Rakshasa' or the signet ring. This is a purely political play with 
no love motive or story from mythology. It deals with the times 
of Chandragupta Maurya, and his chief minister, Chanakya, 
the author of the ArthashSstra, is the hero. In some ways it is a 
remarkably topical play to-day. 

Harsha, the king, who established a new empire early in the 
seventh century A.C., was also a playwright and we have three 
plays written by him. About 700 A.C. there lived Bhavabhuti, 
another shining star in Sanskrit literature. He does not yield 
himself easily to translation for his beauty is chiefly of language, 
but he is very popular in India, and only Kalidasa has prece- 
dence over him. Wilson, who used to be professor of Sanskrit 
at Oxford University, has said of these two: 'It is impossible to 
conceive language so beautifully musical, or so magnificently 
grand, as that of the verses of Bhavabhuti and Kalidasa.' 

The stream of Sanskrit drama continued to flow for centuries, 
but after Murari, early in the ninth century, there is a marked 
delcine in the quality. That decline, and a progressive decay 
were becoming visible also in other forms of life's activities. It 
has been suggested that this decline of the drama may be partly 
due to the lack of royal patronage during the Indo-Afghan and 
Moghul periods and the Islamic disapproval of the drama as an 
art-form, chiefly because of its intimate association with the 
national religion. For this literary drama, apart from the popu- 
lar aspects which continued, was highbrow and sophisticated and 
dependent on aristocratic patronage. But there is little substance 
in this argument though it is possible that political changes 
at the top had some indirect effect. As a matter of fact the 
decline of the Sanskrit drama was obvious long before those 
political changes took place. And even those changes were con- 
fined for some centuries to north India, and if this drama had any 
vitality left it could have continued its creative career in the south. 



The record of the Indo-Afghan, Turkish, and Moghul rulers, 
apart from some brief puritanical periods, is one of definite 
encouragement of Indian culture, occasionally with variations 
and additions to it. Indian music was adopted as a whole and 
with enthusiasm by the Moslem Courts and the nobility and 
some of its greatest masters have been Moslems. Literature and 
poetry were also encouraged and among the noted poets in 
Hindi are Moslems. Ibrahim Adil Shah, the ruler of Bijapur, 
wrote a treatise in Hindi on Indian music. 

Both Indian poetry and music were full of references to the 
Hindu gods and goddesses and yet they were accepted and the 
old allegories and metaphors continued. It might be said that 
except in regard to actual image-making no attempt was made by 
Moslem rulers, apart from a few exceptions, to suppress any art-form. 

The Sanskrit drama declined because much in India was 
declining in those days and the creative spirit was lessening. It 
declined long before the Afghans and Turks established them- 
selves on the throne of Delhi. Subsequently Sanskrit had to com- 
pete to some extent as the learned language of the nobility with 
Persian. But one obvious reason appears to have been the ever- 
widening gap between the language of the Sanskrit drama and 
the languages of day-to-day life. By 1000 A.C. the popular spoken 
languages, out of which our modern languages have grown, 
were beginning to take literary forms. 

Yet, in spite of all this, it is astonishing how the Sanskrit 
drama continued to be produced right through the medieval 
period and up to recent times. In 1892 appeared a Sanskrit 
adaptation of Shakespeare's 'Midsummer Night's Dream.' Manu- 
scripts of old plays are continually being discovered. A list of 
these prepared by Professor Sylvain Levi in 1890 contained 377 
plays by 189 authors. A more recent list contains 650 plays. 

The language of the old plays (of Kalidasa and others) is 
mixed — Sanskrit and one or more Prakrits, that is, popular 
variations of Sanskrit. In the same play educated people speak 
in Sanskrit and ordinary uneducated folk, usually women, 
though there are exceptions, in Prakrit. The poetical and lyrical 
passages, which abound, are in Sanskrit. This mixture probably 
brought the plays nearer to the average audience- It was a com- 
promise between the literary language and the demands of a 
popular art. 

Yet, essentially, the old drama represents an aristocratic art 
meant for sophisticated audiences, usually royal courts and 
the like. Sylvain L6vi compares it, in some ways, to French 
tragedy, which was cut off from the crowd by the choice of its 
subjects and, turning away from real life, created a conventional 
society. 



But apart from this high-class literary theatre, there has always 
been a popular theatre based on stories from Indian mythology 
and the epics, themes well known to the audience, and concerned 
more with display than with any dramatic element. This was in 
the language of the people in each particular area and was 
therefore confined to that area. Sanskrit plays, on the other hand, 
being in the all-India language of the educated, had an all-India 
vogue. 

These Sanskrit plays were undoubtedly meant for acting and 
elaborate stage-directions are given, and rules for seating the 
audience. Unlike the practice in ancient Greece, actresses took 
part in the presentation. In both Greek and Sanskrit there is a 
sensitive awareness of nature and a feeling of being a part of 
that nature. There is a strong lyric element and poetry seems 
to be an integral part of life, full of meaning and significance. 
It was frequently recited. Reading the Greek drama one comes 
across many customs and ways of thought and life which sud- 
denly remind- one of old Indian customs. Nevertheless Greek 
drama is essentially different from the Sanskrit. 

The essential basis of the Greek drama is tragedy, the prob- 
lem of evil. Why does man suffer? Why is there evil in the 
world? The enigma of religion, of God. What a pitiful thing 
is man, child of a day, with his blind and aimless strivings 
against all-powerful fate — 'The Law that abides and changes 
not, ages long....' Man must learn by suffering and, if he is 
fortunate, he will rise above his striving: 

Happy be, on the weary sea 
Who hath fled, the tempest and won the haven. 

Happy whoso has risen, free, 
Above his striving. For strangely graven 

Is the art of life that one and another 

In gold and power may outpass his brother. 

And men in their millions float and flow. 
And seethe with a million hopes as leaven; 

And they win their Will, or they miss their Will, 
And the hopes are dead or are pined for still; 

But whoever can know, 

As the long days go, 
That to Live is happy, hath found his Heaven! 

Man learns by suffering, he learns how to face life, but he learns 
also that the ultimate mystery remains and he cannot find an 
answer to his questions or solve the riddle of good and evil. 

There be many shapes of mystery; 
And many things God brings to be, 
Past hope or fear. 

162 



And the end men looked for cometh not, 
And a path is there where no man thought.* 

There is nothing comparable to the power and majesty of 
Greek tragedy in Sanskrit. Indeed there is no tragedy at all for 
a tragic ending was not permitted. No such fundamental ques- 
tions are discussed for the commonly held patterns of religious 
faith were accepted by the dramatists. Among these were the 
doctrines of rebirth and cause and effect. Accident or evil with- 
out cause was ruled out, for what happens now is the necessary 
result of some previous happening in a former life. There is no 
intervention of blind forces against which man has to fight, 
though his struggles are of no avail. The philosophers and the 
thinkers were not satisfied by these simple explanations and they 
were continually going behind them in their search for final 
causes and fuller explanations. But life was generally governed 
by these beliefs and the dramatists did not challenge them. The 
plays and Sanskrit poetry in general were in full accord with 
the Indian spirit and there are few traces of any rebellion 
against it. 

The rules laid down for dramatic writing were strict and it 
was not easy to break them. Yet there is no meek submission to 
fate; the hero is always a man of courage who faces all hazards. 
'The ignorant rely on Providence', says Chanakya contemptuously 
in the 'Mudra-Rakshasa,' they look to the stars for help instead 
of relying on themselves. Some artificiality creeps in: the hero is 
always the hero, the villain almost always acts villainously; 
there are few intermediate shades. 

Yet there are powerful dramatic situations and moving scenes 

and a background of life which seems like a picture in a dream, 

real and yet unreal, all woven together by a poet's fancy in 

magnificent language. It almost seems, though it may not have 

been so, that life in India was more peaceful, more stable then; 

as if it had discovered its roots and found answer to its questions. 

t flows along serenely and even strong winds and passing storms 

ruffle its surface only. There is nothing like the fierce tempests 

f Greek tragedy. But it is very human and there is an aesthetic 

armony and a logical unity about it. The Nataka, the Indian 

rama, says Sylvain L6vi, still remains the happiest invention 

f the Indian genius. 

Professor A. Berriedale Keithf says also that 'The Sanskrit 

• These two quotations are from Professor Gilbert Murray's translations from Euripides. 

first one is from 'The Bacchae,' and the second from 'Alcestis.' 
t/ have frequently consulted Sylvain Livi's 'he Theatre Indien' (Paris, 1890), and A. 
'"'ale Keith's, 'Sanskrit Drama' (Oxford, 1924), and some quotations have been taken 
these two books. 



drama may legitimately be regarded as the highest product of 
Indian poetry, and as summing up in itself the final conception 
of literary art achieved by the very self-conscious creators of 
Indian literature... .The Brahmin, in fact, much abused as he 
has been in this as in other matters, was the source of the 
intellectual distinction of India. As he produced Indian philo 
sophy, so by another effort of his intellect he evolved the subtle 
and effective form of the drama.' 

An English translation of Shudraka's 'Mrichhkatika' was 
staged in New York in 1924. Mr. Joseph Wood Krutch, the 
dramatic critic of the Nation, wrote of it as follows: 'Here, if 
anywhere, the spectator will be able to see a genuine example 
of that pure art theatre of which theorists talk, and here, too 
he will be led to meditate upon that real wisdom of the East 
which lies not in esoteric doctrine but in a tenderness far deepe 
and truer than that of the traditional Christianity which has been 
so thoroughly corrupted by the hard righteousness of Hebraism.. . 
A play wholly artificial yet profoundly moving because it is not 
realistic but real. ... Whoever the author may have been, and 
whether he lived in the fourth century or the eighth, he 
was a man gcod and wise with the goodness and wisdom which 
come not from the lips or the smoothly flowing pen of the moralist 
but from the heart. An exquisite sympathy with the fresh beauty 
of youth and love tempered his serenity, and he was old enough 
to understand that a light-hearted story of ingenious complication 
could be made the vehicle of tender humanity and confident 

goodness Such a play can be produced only by a civilization 

which has reached stability; when a civilization has thought 
its way through all the problems it faces, it must come to rest 
upon something calm and naive like this. Macbeth and Othello 
however great and stirring they might be, are barbarous heroes 
because the passionate tumult of Shakespeare is the tumult pro 
duced by the conflict between a newly awakened sensibility and 
a series of ethical concept? inherited from the savage age. The 
realistic drama of our own time is a product of a like confusion 
but when problems are settled, and when passions are reconciled 
with the decisions of an intellect, then form alone remains. . . 
Nowhere in our European past do we find, this side the classics, 
a work more completely civilized.' 

Vitality and Persistence of Sanskrit 

Sanskrit is a language amazingly rich, efflorescent, full of luxu 
riant growth of all kinds, and yet precise and strictly keepin 
within the framework of grammar which Panini laid down tw 
thousand six hundred years ago. It spread out, added to its 

164 



richness, became fuller and more ornate, but always it stuck to 
its original roots. 

In the years of the decline of Sanskrit literature, it lost some 
of its power and simplicity of style and became involved in highly 
complex forms and elaborate similes and metaphors. The gram- 
matical rule which enable words to be joined together, became 
in the hands of the epigones a mere device to show off their 
cleverness by combining whole strings of words running into 
many lines. 

Sir William Jones observed as long ago as 1784: 'The Sanskrit 
language, whatever be its antiquity, is of a wonderful structure; 
more perfect than the Greek, more copious than the Latin and 
more exquisitely refined than either: yet bearing to both of them 
a stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs, and in the forms 
of grammar, than could possibly have been produced by accident; 
so strong indeed, that no philologer could examine them all without 
believing them to have sprung from some common source which 

perhaps no longer exists '- 

William Jones was followed by many other European scholars, 
English, French, German, and others, who studied Sanskrit and 
laid the foundations of a new science — comparative philology. 
German scholarship forged ahead in this new domain and it is 
to these German scholars of the nineteenth century that the grea- 
test credit must go for research in Sanskrit. Practically every 
German university had a Sanskrit department, with one or two 
professors in charge of it. 

Indian scholarship, which was considerable, was of the old 
style, uncritical and seldom acquainted with foreign classical 
languages, except Arabic and Persian. A new type of scholarship 
arose in India under European inspiration, and many Indians 
went to Europe (usually to Germany) to train themselves in the 
new methods of research and critical and comparative study. 
These Indians had an advantage over the Europeans, and yet 
there was a disadvantage also. The disadvantage was due to 
certain preconceived notions, inherited beliefs and tradition, 
which came in the way of dispassionate criticism. The advantage, 
and it was great, was the capacity to enter into the spirit of the 
writing, to picture the environment in which it grew and thus to 
be more in tune with it. 

A language is something infinitely greater than grammar and 
philology. It is the poetic testament of the genius of a race and 
a culture, and the living embodiment of the thoughts and fancies 
that have moulded them. Words change their meanings from 
age to age and old ideas transform themselves into new, often 
keeping their old attire. It is difficult to capture the meaning, 
much less the spirit, of an old word or phrase. Some kind of a 
romantic and poetical approach is necessary if we are to have 



a glimpse into that old meaning and into the minds of those who 
used the language in former days. The richer and more abundant 
the language, the greater the difficulty. Sanskrit, like other classical 
languages, is full of words which have not only poetic beauty 
but a deep significance, a host of associated ideas, which cannot 
be translated into a language foreign in spirit and outlook. 
Even its grammar, its philosophy, have a strong poetic content; 
one of its old dictionaries is in poetic form. 

It is no easy matter, even for those of us who have studied 
Sanskrit, to enter into the spirit of this ancient tongue and to 
live again in its world of long ago. Yet we may do so to a small 
extent, for we are the inheritors of old traditions and that old 
world still clings to our fancies. Our modern languages in India 
are children of Sanskrit, and to it owe most of their vocabularly 
and their forms of expression. Many rich and significant words 
in Sanskrit poetry and philosophy, untranslatable in foreign 
languages, are still living parts of our popular languages. And 
Sanskrit itself, though long dead as a language of the people, 
has still an astonishing vitality. But for foreigners, however 
learned, the difficulties become greater. Unfortunately, scholars 
and learned men are seldom poets, and it is the scholar poet 
who is required to interpret a language. From these scholars we 
usually get, as M. Barth has pointed out, 'traductions infidfeles 
& force d'etre litterales.' 

So while the study of comparative philology has progressed 
and much research work has been done in Sanskrit, it is rather 
barren and sterile from the point of view of a poetic and romantic 
approach to this language. There is hardly any translation in 
English or any other foreign language from the Sanskrit which 
can be called worthy of or just to the original. Both Indians and 
foreigners have failed in this work for different reasons. That is 
a great pity and the world misses something that is full of beauty 
and imagination and deep thinking, something that is not merely 
the heritage of India but should be the heritage of the human 
race. 

The hard discipline, reverent approach, and insight of the 
English translation of the Authorized Version of the Bible, not 
only produced a noble book, but gave to the English language 
strength and dignity. Generations of European scholars and 
poets have laboured lovingly over Greek and Latin classics and 
produced fine translations In various European languages. And 
so even common folk can >hare to some extent in those cultures 
and, in their drab lives, have glimpses of truth and loveliness. 
Unfortunately, this work has yet to be done with the Sanskrit 
classics. When it will be done, or whether it will be done at all, 
I do not know. Our scholars grow in numbers and grow in scho- 
larship, and we have our poets too, but between the two there is 

166 



a wide and ever-growing gap. Our creative tendencies are turned 
in a different direction, and the many demands that the world 
of to-day makes upon us hardly give us time for the leisured study 
of the classics. Especially in India we have to look another way 
and makeup for long lost time; we have been too much immersed 
in the classics in the past, and because we lost our own creative 
instincts we ceased to be inspired even by those classics which we 
claimed to cherish so much. Translations, I suppose, from the 
Indian classics will continue to appear, and scholars will see to 
it that the Sanskrit words and names are properly spelt and have 
all the necessary -diacritical marks, and that there are plenty of 
notes and explanations and comparisons. There will be everything, 
in fact, literally and conscientiously rendered, only the living 
spirit will be missing. What was a thing of life and joy, so lovely 
and musical and full of imaginative daring, will become old and 
flat and stale, with neither youth nor beauty, but with only the 
dust of the scholar's study and the smell of midnight oil. 

For how long Sanskrit has been a dead language, in the sense 
of not being popularly spoken, I do not know. Even in the days 
of Kalidasa it was not the people's language, though it was the 
language of educated people throughout India. So it continued 
for centuries, and even spread to the Indian colonies in south-east 
Asia and central Asia. There are records of regular Sanskrit 
recitations, and possibly plays also, in Cambodia in the seventh 
century A.C. Sanskrit is still used for some ceremonial purposes 
in Thailand (Siam). In India the vitality of Sanskirt has been 
amazing. When the Afghan rulers had established themselves on 
the throne of Delhi, about the beginning of the thirteenth century, 
Persian became the court language over the greater part of India 
and, gradually, many educated people took to it in preference to 
Sanskrit. The popular languages also grew and developed literary 
forms. Yet in spite of all this Sanskrit continued, though it dec- 
lined in quality. Speaking at the Oriental Conference held in 
1937 at Trivandrum, over which he presided, Dr. F. F. Thomas 
pointed out what a great unifying force Sanskrit had been in India 
and how widespread its use still was. He actually suggested that 
a simple form of Sanskrit, a kind of basic Sanskrit, should be 
encouraged as a common all-India language to-day! He quoted, 
agreeing with him, what Max Miiller had said previously: 'Such 
is the marvellous continuity between the past and the present in 
India, that in spite of repeated social convulsions, religious 
reforms, and foreign invasions, Sanskrit may be said to be still 
the only language spoken over the whole extent of that vast 

country Even at the present moment, after a century of 

English rule and English teaching, I believe that Sanskrit is more 
widely understood in India than Latin was in Europe at the 
time of Dante.' 



I have no idea of the number of people who understood Latin 
in the Europe of Dante's time; nor do I know how many under- 
stand Sanskrit in India to-day; but the number of these latter 
is still large, especially in the south. Simple spoken Sanskrit is 
not very difficult to follow for those who know well any of the 
present-day Indo-Aryan languages — Hindi, Bengali, Marathi, 
Gujrati, etc. Even present-day Urdu, itself wholly an Indo-Aryan 
language, probably contains 80 per cent words derived from 
Sanskrit. It is often difficult to say whether a word has come 
from Persian or Sanskrit, as the root words in both these 
languages are alike. Curiously enough, the Dravidian languages 
of the south, though entirely different in origin, have borrowed 
and adopted such masses of words from the Sanskrit that nearly 
half their vocabulary is very nearly allied to Sanskrit. 

Books in Sanskrit on a variety of subjects, including dramatic 
works, continued to be written throughout the medieval period 
and right up to modern times. Indeed, such books still appear 
from time to time, and so do Sanskrit magazines. The standard 
is not high and they do not add anything of value to Sanskrit 
literature. But the surprising thing is that this hold of Sanskrit 
should continue in this way throughout this long period. Some- 
times public gatherings are still addressed in Sanskrit, though 
naturally the audiences are more or less select. 

This continuing use of Sanskrit has undoubtedly prevented 
the normal growth of the modern Indian languages. The edu- 
cated intellectuals looked upon them as vulgar tongues not 
suited to any creative or learned work, which was written in 
Sanskrit, or later not infrequently in Persian. In spite of this 
handicap the great provincial languages gradually took shape 
in the course of centuries, developed literary forms, and built 
up their literatures. 

It is interesting to note that in modern Thailand when the 
need arose for new technical, scientific, and governmental terms, 
many of these were adapted from Sanskrit. 

The ancient Indians attached a great deal of importance to 
sound, and hence their writing, poetry or prose, had a rhythmic 
and musical quality. Special efforts were made to ensure the 
correct enunciation of words and elaborate rules were laid down 
for this purpose. This became all the more necessary as, in the 
old days, teaching was oral, and whole books were committed 
to memory and thus handed down from generation to genera- 
tion. The significance attached to the sound of words led to 
attempts to co-ordinate the sense with the sound, resulting some- 
times in delightful combinations, and at other times in crude 
and artificial mixtures. E. H. Johnstone has written about this: 
'The classical poets of India have a sensitiveness to variations of 
sound, to which the literature of other countries afford few 



parallels, and their delicate combinations are a source of never- 
failing joy. Some of them, however, are inclined to attempt to 
match the sense with the sound in a way that is decidedly lack- 
ing in subtlety, and they have perpetrated real atrocities in the 
manufacture of verses with a limited number of consonants or 
even only one.'* 

Recitations from the Vedas, even in the present day, are done 
according to the precise rules for enunciation laid down in 
ancient times. 

The modern Indian languages descended from the Sanskrit, 
and therefore called Indo-Aryan languages, are: Hindi-Urdu, 
Bengali, Marathi, Gujrati, Oriya, Assamese, Rajasthani (a vari- 
ation of Hindi), Punjabi, Sindhi, Pashto, and Kashmiri. 
The Dravidian languages are: Tamil, Telugu, Kanarese, and 
Malayalam. These fifteen languages cover the whole of India, 
and of these, Hindi, with its variation Urdu, is far the most wide- 
spread and is understood even where it is not spoken. Apart from 
these, there are only some dialects and some undeveloped 
languages spoken, in very limited areas, by some backward hill 
and forest tribes. The oft-repeated story of Ind'a having five 
hundred or more languages is a fiction of the mind of the philo- 
logist and the census commissioner who notes down every variation 
in dialect and every petty hill-tongue on the Assam-Bengal frontier 
with Burma as a separate language, although sometimes it is 
spoken only by a few hundred or a few thousand persons. Most 
of these so-cailed hundreds of languages are confined to this 
eastern frontier of India and to the eastern border tracts of 
Burma. According to the method adopted by census commis- 
sioners, Europe has hundreds of languages and Germany was, 
I think, listed as having about sixty. 

The real language question in India has nothing to do with 
this variety. It is practically confined to Hindi-Urdu, one lan- 
guage with two literary forms and two scripts. As spoken there is 
hardly any difference; as written, especially in literary style, the 
gap widens. Attempts have been, and are being, made to lessen 
this gap and develop a common form, which is usually styled 
Hindustani. This is developing into a common language under- 
stood all over India. 

Pashto, one of the Indo-Aryan languages derived from Sans- 
krit, is the popular language in the North West Frontier Province 
as well as in Afghanistan. It has been influenced, more than any 
of our other languages, by Persian. This frontier area has in the 
past produced a succession of brilliant thinkers, scholars, and 
grammarians in Sanskrit. 

The language of Ceylon is Singhalese. This is also an Indc- 

*From E. H. Johnstone's translation of 'Asvaghosa's Buddhaearita' (Lahore, 1936). 

169 



Aryan language derived directly from Sanskrit. The Singhalese 
people have not only got their religion, Buddhism, from India, 
but are racially and linguistically akin to Indians. 

Sanskrit, it is now well recognized, is allied to the European 
classical and modern languages. Even the Slavonic languages 
have many common forms and roots with Sanskrit. The nearest 
approach to Sanskrit in Europe is made by the Lithuanian 
language. 

Buddhist Philosophy 

Buddha, it is said, used the popular language of the area he lived 
in, which was a Prakrit, a derivative of Sanskrit. He must have 
known Sanskrit, of course, but he preferred to speak in the popular 
tongue so as to reach the people. From this Prakrit developed 
the Pali language of the early Buddhist scriptures. Buddha's 
dialogues and other accounts and discussions were recorded in 
Pali long after his death, and these form the basis of Buddhism 
in Ceylon, Burma, and Siam, where the Hinayana form of 
Buddhism prevails. 

Some hundreds of years after Buddha there was a revival of 
Sanskrit in India, and Buddhist scholars wrote their philo- 
sophical and other works in Sanskrit. Ashvaghosha's writings 
and plays (the earliest plays we have), which are meant to be 
propaganda for Buddhism, are in Sanskrit. These Sanskrit writ- 
ings of Buddhist scholars in India went to China, Japan, Tibet, 
and Central Asia, where the Mahayana form of Buddhism pre- 
vailed. 

The age which gave birth to the Buddha had been one of 
tremendous mental ferment and philosophic inquiry in India. 
And not in India only for that was the age ofLao-tze and Confucius, 
of Zoroaster and Pythagoras. In India it gave rise to materialism 
as well as to the Bhagavad Gita, to Buddhism and Jainism, and to 
many other currents of thought which were subsequently to consoli- 
date themselves in the various systems of Indian philosophy. 
There were different strata of thought, one leading to another, 
and sometimes overlapping each other. 

Different schools of philosophy developed side by side with 
Buddhism, and Buddhism itself had schisms leading to the forma- 
tion of different schools of thought. The philosophic spirit gradually 
declined giving place to scholasticism and polemical controversy. 

Buddha had repeatedly warned his people against learned 
controversy over metaphysical problems. 'Whereof one cannot 
speak thereof one must be silent,' he is reported to have said. 
Truth was to be found in life itself and not in argument about 
matters outside the scope of life and therefore beyond the ken 
of the human intellect. He emphasized the ethical aspects of life 



and evidently felt that these suffered and were neglected because 
of a preoccupation with metaphysical subtleties. Early Buddhism 
reflected to some extent this philosophic and rational spirit of the 
Buddha, and its inquiries were based on experience. In the world 
of experience the concept of pure being could not be grasped and 
was therefore put aside; so also the idea of a creator God, which 
was a presumption not capable of logical proof. Nevertheless the 
experience remained and was real enough in a sense; what could 
this be except a mere flux of becoming, ever changing into some- 
thing else? So these intermediate degrees of reality were recognized 
and further inquiry proceeded on these lines on a psychological basis. 
Buddha, rebel as he was, hardly cut himself off from the ancient 
faith of the land. Mrs. Rhys Davids says that 'Gautama was born 

and brought up and lived and died as a Hindu There was not 

much in the metaphysics and principles of Gautama which can- 
not be found in one or other of the orthodox systems, and a great 
deal of his morality could be matched from earlier or later Hindu 
books. Such originality as Gautama possessed lay in the way in 
which he adapted, enlarged, ennobled, and systematized that 
which had already been well said by others; in the way in which 
he carried out to their logical conclusion principles of equity and 
justice already acknowledged by some of the most prominent 
Hindu thinkers. The difference between him and other teachers 
lay chiefly in his deep earnestness and in his broad public spirit 
of philanthropy.'* 

Yet Buddha had sown the seeds of revolt against the conven- 
tional practice of the religion of his day. It was not his theory or 
philosophy that was objected to — for every conceivable philosophy 
could be advocated within the fold of orthodox belief so long as 
it remained a theory — but the interference with the social life and 
organization of the people. The old system was free and flexible 
in thought, allowing for every variety of opinion, but in practice 
it was rigid, and non-conformity with practice was not approved. 
So, inevitably, Buddhism tended to break away from the old faith, 
and, after Buddha's death, the breach widened. 

With the decline of early Buddhism, the Mahayana form deve- 
loped, the older form being known as the Hinayana. It was in this 
Mahayana that Buddha was made into a god and devotion to him 
as a personal god developed. The Buddha image also appeared 
from the Grecian north-west. About the same time there was a 
revival of Brahminism in India and of Sanskrit scholarship. 

Between the Hinayana and the Mahayana there was bitter 
controversy and the debate and opposition to each other has 
continued throughout subsequent history. The HinSyana countries 

*This quotation, as well as much else, is taken from Sir S. Radhakrishnan" s 'Indian Philo- 
sophy {George Allen and Unwin, London, 1940). 

171 



(Ceylon, Burma, Siam) even now rather look down upon the 
Buddhism that prevails in China and Japan, and I suppose this 
feeling is reciprocated. 

While the Hinayana adhered, in some measure, to the ancient 
purity of doctrine and circumscribed it in a Pali Canon, the 
Mahayana spread out in every direction, tolerating almost every- 
thing and adapting itself to each country's distinctinve outlook. 
In India it began to approach the popular religion; in each of the 
other countries — China and Japan and Tibet — it had a separate 
development. Some of the greatest of the early Buddhist thinkers 
moved away from the agnostic attitude which Buddha had taken 
up in regard to the existence of the soul and rejected it completely. 

Among a galaxy of men of remarkable intellect, Nagarjuna 
stands out as one of the greatest minds that India has produced. 
He lived during Kanishka's reign, about the beginning of the 
Christian era, and he was chiefly responsible for formulating the 
Mahayana doctrines. The power and daring of his thought are 
remarkable and he is not afraid of arriving at conclusions which 
to most people must have appeared as scandalous and shocking. 
With a ruthless logic he pursues his argument till it leads him to 
deny even what he believed in. Thought cannot know itself and 
cannot go outside itself or know another. There is no God apart 
from the universe, and no universe apart from God, and both are 
epually appearances. 

And so he goes on till there is nothing left, no distinction be- 
tween truth and error, no possibility of understanding or mis- 
understanding anything, for how can anyone misunderstand the 
unreal? Nothing is real. The world has only a phenomenal exist- 
ence; it is just an ideal system of qualities and relations, in which 
we believe but which we cannot intelligibly explain. Yet behind 
all this experience he hints at something — the Absolute — which 
is beyond the capacity of our thinking, for in the very process of 
thought it becomes something relative.* 

This absolute is often referred to in Buddhist philosophy as 
Shunyata or nothingness (Shunya is the word for the zero mark) 

^Professor Th. Stcherbatsky of the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R., in his book ' The 
Conception of Buddhist Nirvana' (Leningrad, 1927) suggests that Nagarjuna should be placed 
'among the great philosophers of humanity.' He refers to his 'wonderful style' which never 
ceases to be interesting, bold, baffling, sometimes seemingly arrogant. He compares Nagar- 
juna's views with those of Bradley and Hegel: 'Very remarkable are then the coincidences 
between Nagarjuna's negativism and the condemnation by Mr. Bradley of almost every 
conception of the everyday world: things and qualities, relations, space and time, change, 
causation, motion, the self From the Indian standpoint Bradley can be characterised as a 
genuine Madhyamika. But above all these parallelisms we may perhaps find a still greater 
family likeness between the dialectical method of Hegel and Nagarjuna's dialectics ' 

Stcherbatsky points out certain resemblances between some of the Buddhist schools of 
philosophy and the outlook of modern science, especially the conception of the final condition 
of the universe according to the law of entropy. He gives an interesting story. When the 

172 



yet it is something very different from our conception of vacancy 
or nothingness.* In our world of experience we have to call it 
nothingness for there is no other word for it, but in terms of meta- 
physical reality it means something transcendent and immanent 
in all things. 

Says a famous Buddhist scholar: 'It is on account of Shunyata 
that everything becomes possible, without it nothing in the world 
is possible.' 

All this shows where metaphysics leads to and how wise was 
Buddha's warning against such speculations. Yet the human 
mind refuses to imprison itself and continues to reach out for 
that fruit of knowledge which it well knows is beyond reach. 
Metaphysics developed in Buddhist philosophy but the method 
was based on a psychological approach. Again, it is surprising 
to find the insight into the psychological states of the mind. The 
subconscious self of modern psychology is clearly envisaged and 
discussed. An extraordinary passage in one of the old books has been 
pointed out to me. This reminds one in a way of the Oedipus 
Complex theory, though the approach is wholly different. | 

Four definite schools of philosophy developed in Buddhism, 
two of these belonged to the Hinayana branch, and two to the 
Mahayana. All these Buddhist systems of philosophy have their 
origin in the Upanishads, but they do not accept the authority 
of the Vedas. It is this denial of the Vedas that distinguishes them 
from the so-called Hindu systems of philosophy which developed 
about the same time. These latter, while accepting the Vedas 
generally and, in a sense, paying formal obeisance to them, do 
not consider them as infallible, and indeed go their own way without 
much regard for them. As the Vedas and the Upanishads spoke 

educational authorities of newly founded republic of Burials in Transbaikalia in the U.S.S.R. 
started an anti-religious propaganda, they emphasized that modern science takes a materia- 
listic view of the universe. The Buddhist monks of that republic, who were Mahayanists, 
retorted in a pamphlet, pointing out that materialism was not unknown to them and that, 
in fact, one of their schools had developed a materialistic theory. 

* Professor Stcherbatsky who is an authority on the subject, having personally examined the 
original texts in various languages, including Tibetan, says that 'shunyata' is relativity. 
Everything being relative and interdependent has no absoluteness by itself. Hence it is 'shunya. ' 
On the other hand, there is something entirely beyond the phenomenal world, but comprising 
it, which might be considered the absolute. This cannot be conceived or described in terms 
of the finite and phenomenal world and hence it is referred to as 'tathata' or thatness, suchness. 
This absolute has also been called 'shunyata'. 

f This occurs in Vasubandhu's' Abhidharmakosa' , which was written in the early fifth century 
A.C., collecting previous views and traditions. The original in Sanskrit has been lost. But 
Chinese and Tibetan translations exist. The Chinese translation is by the famous Chinese 
pilgrim to India, Hsuan Tsang. From this Chinese translation a French translation has been 
made (Paris-Louvain, 1926). My colleague and companion in detention, Acharya Narendra 
Dev, has been translating this book from the French into Hindi and English, and he 
pointed out this passage to me. It is in the third chapter. 

173 



with many voices, it was always possible for subsequent thinkers 
to emphasize one aspect rather than another, and to build their 
system on this foundation. 

Professor Radhakrishnan thus describes the logical movement of 
Buddhist thought as it found expression in the four schools. It 
begins with a dualistic metaphysics looking upon knowledge as 
a direct awareness of objects. In the next stage ideas are made 
the media through which reality is apprehended, thus raising a 
screen between mind and things. These two stages represent the 
Hinayana schools. The Mahayana schools went further and 
abolished the things behind the images and reduced all experience 
to a series of ideas in their mind. The ideas of relativity and the 
sub-conscious self come in. In the last stage — this was Nagarjuna's 
Madhyamika philospohy or the middle way — mind itself is 
dissolved into mere ideas, leaving us with loose units of ideas and 
perceptions about which we can say nothing definite. 

Thus we arrive finally at airy nothing, or something that is 
so difficult to grasp for our finite minds that it cannot be described 
or defined. The most we can say is that it is some kind of conscious- 
ness — vijyana as it is called. 

In spite of this conclusion arrived at by psychological and 
metaphysical analysis which ultimately reduces the conception of 
the invisible world or the absolute to pure consciousness, and thus 
to nothing, so far as we can use or comprehend words, it is 
emphasized that ethical relations have a definite value in our finite 
world. So in our lives and in our human relations we have to con- 
form to ethics and live the good life. To that life and to this pheno- 
menal world we can and should apply reason and knowledge and 
experience. The infinite, or whatever it may be called, lies some- 
where in the beyond and to it therefore these cannot be applied. 

Effect of Buddhism on Hinduism 

What was the effect of Buddha's teachings on the old Aryan reli- 
gion and the popular beliefs that prevailed in India? There can 
be no doubt that they produced powerful and permanent effects 
on many aspects of religious and national life. Buddha may not 
have thought of himself as the founder of a new religion; probably 
he looked upon himself as a reformer only. But his dynamic perso- 
nality and his forceful messages attacking many social and religious 
practices inevitably led to conflict with the entrenched priesthood. 
He did not claim to be an uprooter of the existing social order or 
economic system; he accepted their basic premises and only at- 
tacked the evils that had grown under them. Nevertheless he 
functioned, to some extent, as a social revolutionary and it was 
because of this that he angered the Brahmin class who were inter- 
ested in the continuance of the existing social practices. There is 

174 



nothing in Buddha's teachings that cannot be reconciled with 
the wide-flung range of Hindu thought. But when Brahmin supre- 
macy was attacked it was a different matter. 

It is interesting to note that Buddhism first took root in 
Magadha, that part of northern India where Brahminism was 
weak. It spread gradually west and north and many Brahmins 
also joined it. To begin with, it was essentially a Kshatriya move- 
ment but with a popular appeal. Probably it was due to the 
Brahmins, who later joined it, that it developed more along philo- 
sophical and metaphysical lines. It may have been due also chiefly 
to the Brahmin Buddhists that the Mahayana form developed; 
for, in some ways, and notably in its catholic variety, this was more 
akin to the varied form of the existing Aryan faith. 

Buddhism influenced Indian life in a hundred ways, as it was 
bound to, for it must be remembered that it was a living, dynamic, 
and widespread religion in India for over a thousand years. Even in 
the long years of its decline in India, and when later it practically 
ceased to count as a separate religion here, much of it remained 
as a part of the Hindu faith and in national ways of life and thought. 
Even though the religion as such was ultimately rejected by the 
people, the ineffaceable imprint of it remained and powerfully 
influenced the development of the race. This permanent effect 
had little to do with dogma or philosophic theory or religious 
belief. It was the ethical and social and practical idealism of Buddha 
and his religion that influenced our people and left their imperish- 
able marks upon them, even as the ethical ideals of Christianity 
affected Europe though it may not pay much attention to its dogmas, 
and as Islam's human, social, and practical approach influenced 
many people who were not attracted by its religious forms and 
beliefs. 

The Aryan faith in India was essentially a national religion 
restricted to the land, and the social caste structure it was deve- 
loping emphasized this aspect of it. There were no missionary 
enterprises, no proselytization, no looking outside the frontiers 
of India. Within India it proceeded on its own unobtrusive and 
subconscious way and absorbed new-comers and old, often 
forming new castes out of them. This attitude to the outside world 
was natural for those days, for communications were difficult 
and the need for foreign contacts hardly arose. There were no doubt 
such contacts for trade and other purposes but they made no 
difference to India's life and ways. The ocean of Indian life was a 
self-contained one, big and diverse enough to allow full play for 
its many currents, self-conscious and absorbed in itself, caring 
little for what happened beyond its boundaries. In the very heart 
of this ocean burst forth a new spring, pouring out a fountain of 
fresh and limpid water, which ruffled the old surface and over- 
flowed, not caring at all for those old boundaries and barriers 



that man and nature had erected. In this fountain of Buddha's 
teaching the appeal was to the nation but it was also to more than 
the nation. It was a universal call for the good life and it recognized 
no barriers of class or caste or nation. 

This was a novel approach for the India of his day. Ashoka was 
the first person to act upon it in a big way with his embassies to, 
and missionary activities in, foreign countries. India thus began 
to develop an awareness of the world, and probably it was largely 
this that led, in the early centuries of the Christian era, to vast 
colonial enterprises. These expeditions across the seas were orga- 
nized by Hindu rulers and they carried the Brahminical system and 
Aryan culture with them. This was an extraordinary development 
for a self-contained faith and culture which were gradually build- 
ing up a mutually exclusive caste system. Only a powerful urge 
and something changing their basic outlook could have brought 
this about. That urge may have been due to many reasons, and 
most of all to trade and the needs of an expanding society, but the 
change of outlook was partly due to Buddhism and the foreign 
contacts it had brought about. Hinduism was dynamic enough and full 
of an overflowing energy at the time but it had previously not paid 
much attention to foreign countries. One of the effects of the 
universalism of the new faith was to encourage this dynamic energy 
to flow out to distant countries. 

Much of the ritualism and ceremonial associated with the Vedic, 
as well as more popular forms of religion, disappeared, particularly 
animal sacrifices. The idea of non-violence, already present in 
the Vedas and Upanishads, were emphasized by Buddhism and 
and even more so by Jainism. There was a new respect for life and 
a kindness to animals. And always behind all this was the endea- 
vour to lead the good life, the higher life. 

Buddha had denied the moral value of austere asceticism. But 
the whole effect of his teaching was one of pessimism towards life. 
This was especially the Hinayana view and even more so that of 
Jainism. There was an emphasis on other-worldliness, a desire 
for liberation, of freedom from the burdens of the world. Sexual 
continence was encouraged and vegetarianism increased. All these 
ideas were present in India before the Buddha but the emphasis 
was different. The emphasis of the old Aryan ideal was on a full 
and all-rounded life. The student stage was one of continence and 
discipline, the householder participated fully in life's activities and 
took sex as part of them. Then came a gradual withdrawal and a 
greater concentration on public service and individual improve- 
ment. Only the last stage of life, when old age had come, was that 
ofsanyasa or full withdrawal from life's normal work and attachments. 

Previously small groups of ascetically inclined people lived in 
forest settlements, usually attracting students. With the coming 
of Buddhism huge monasteries and nunneries grew up every- 

176 



where and there was a regular flow of population towards them. 
The very name of the province of Bihar to-day is derived from 
Vihara, monastery, which indicates how full that huge area must 
have been of monasteries. Such monasteries were educational 
establishments also or were connected with schools and some- 
times with universities. 

Not only India but the whole of Central Asia had large numbers 
of huge Buddhist monasteries. There was a famous one in Balkh, 
accommodating 1,000 monks, of which we have many records. 
This was called Nava-vihara, the new monastery, which was 
Persianized into Naubahar. 

Why was it that Buddhism resulted in the growth of other- 
worldliness in India far more than in some other countries where 
it has flourished for long periods — in China, Japan and Burma? 
I do not know, but I imagine that the national background of 
each country was strong enough to mould the religion according 
to its shape. China, for instance, had the powerful traditions derived 
from Confucius and Lao-tze and other philosophers. Then again, 
China and Japan adopted the Mahayana form of Buddhism which 
was less pessimistic in its approach than the Hinayana. India was 
also influenced by Jainism which was the most otherworldly and 
life-negating of all these doctrines and philosophies. 

Yet another very curious effect of Buddhism in India and on 
its social structure appears to have been one that was entirely 
opposed to its whole outlook. This was in relation to caste, which 
it did not approve of though it accepted its original basis. The 
caste system in the time of the Buddha was flexible and had not 
developed the rigidity of later periods. More importance was 
attached to capacity, character, and occupation, than to birth. 
Buddha himself often uses the term Brahmin as equivalent to an 
able, earnest, and disciplined person. There is a famous story in 
the Chhandogya Upanishad which shows us how caste and sex 
relations were viewed then. 

This is the story of Satyakama whose mother was Jabala. 
Satyakama wanted to become a student of the sage Gautama 
(not the Buddha) and, as he was leaving his home, he asked his 
mother: 'Of what gotra (family or clan) am I?' His mother said 
to him: 'I do not know, my child, of what family thou art. In 
my youth when I had to move about much as a servant (waiting 
on the guests in my father's house), I conceived thee. I do not 
know of what family thou art. I was Jabala by name, thou art 
Satyakama. Say that thou art Satyakama Jabala (that is, Satya- 
kama, the son of Jabala).' 

Satyakama then went to Gautama and the sage asked him 
about his family. He replied in the words of his mother. There- 
upon the teacher said: 'No one but a true Brahmin would thus 
speak out. Go and fetch fuel, friend. I shall initiate you. You have 

177 



not swerved from the truth.* 

Probably at the time of the Buddha the Brahmins were the only 
more or less rigid caste. The Kshatriyas or the ruling class were 
proud of their group and family traditions but, as a class, their 
doors were open for the incorporation of individuals or families 
who became rulers. For the rest most people were Vaishyas, the 
agriculturists, an honoured calling. There were other occupational 
castes also. The so-called caste-less people, the untouchables, 
appear to have been very few, probably some forest folk and some 
whose occupation was the disposal of dead bodies, etc. 

The emphasis of Jainism and Buddhism on non-violence led to 
the tilling of the soil being considered a lowly occupation, for it 
often resulted in the destruction of animal life. This occupation, 
which had been the pride of the Indo-Aryans, went down in the 
scale of values in some parts of the country, in spite of its funda- 
mental importance, and those who actually tilled the land des- 
cended in the social scale. 

Thus Buddhism, which was a revolt against priestcraft and 
ritualism and against the degradation of any human being and 
his deprivation of the opportunities of growth and leading a 
higher life, unconsciously led to the degradation of vast numbers 
of tillers of the soil. It would be wrong to make Buddhism respon- 
sible for this, for it had no such effect elsewhere. There was some- 
thing inherent in the caste system which took it in this direction. 
Jainism pushed it along that way because of its passionate attach- 
ment to non-violence — Buddhism also inadvertently helped in 
the process. 

How did Hinduism Absorb Buddhism in India? 

Eight or nine years ago, when I was in Paris, Andre Malraux 
put me a strange question at the very beginning of our conversa- 
tion. What was it, he asked me, that enabled Hinduism, to push 
away organized Buddhism from India, without any major con- 
flict, over a thousand years ago? How did Hinduism succeed in 
absorbing, as it were, a great and widespread popular religion, 
without the usual wars of religion which disfigure the history 
of so many countires? What inner vitality or strength did Hinduism 
possess then which enabled it to perform this remarkable feat? 
And did India possess this inner vitality and strength to-day? If 
so, then her freedom and greatness were assured. 

The question was perhaps typical of a French intellectual who 
was also a man of action. And yet few persons in Europe or America 
would trouble themselves over such matters; they would be much 
too full of the problems of to-day. Those present-day world prob- 
lems filled and troubled Malraux also, and with his powerful and 
analytical mind he sought light wherever he could find it in the 

178 



past or in the present — in thought, speech, writing, or, best of all, 
in action, in the game of life and death. 

For Malraux the question was obviously not just an academic 
one. He was full of it and he burst out with it as soon as we met. 
It was a question after my own heart, or rather the kind of ques- 
tion that my own mind was frequently framing. But I had no 
satisfactory answer to it for him or for myself. There are answers 
and explanations enough, but they seem to miss the core of the 
problem. 

It is clear that there was no widespread or violent extermina- 
tion of Buddhism in India. Occasionally there were local troubles 
or conflicts between a Hindu ruler and the Buddhist Sangha, or 
organization of monks, which had grown powerful. These had 
usually a political origin and they did not make any essential 
difference. It must also be remembered that Hinduism was at 
no time wholly displaced by Buddhism. Even when Buddhism 
was at its height in India, Hinduism was widely prevalent. 
Buddhism died a natural death in India, or rather it was a 
fading out and a transformation into something else. 'India,' 
says Keith, 'has a strange genius for converting what it borrows 
and assimilating it.' If that is true of borrowings from abroad or 
from alien sources, still more is it applicable to something that 
came out of its own mind and thought. Buddhism was not only 
entirely a product of India; its philosophy was in line with pre- 
vious Indian thought and the philosophy of the Vedanta (the 
Upanishads). The Upanishads had even ridiculed priestcraft and 
ritualism and minimised the importance of caste. 

Brahminism and Buddhism acted and reacted on each other, 
and in spite of their dialectical conflicts or because of them, 
approached nearer to each other, both in the realm of philosophy 
and that of popular belief. The Mahayana especially approached 
the Brahminical system and forms. It was prepared to compromise 
with almost anything, so long as its ethical background remained. 
Brahminism made of Buddha an avatar, a God. So did Buddhism. 
The Mahayana doctrine spread rapidly but it lost in quality and 
distinctiveness what it gained in extent. The monasteries became 
rich, centres of vested interests, and their discipline became lax;. 
Magic and superstition crept into the popular forms of worship. 
There was a progressive degeneration of Buddhism in India after 
the first millenium of its existence. Mrs. Rhys Davids points out 
its diseased state during that period: 'under the overpowering 
influence of these sickly imaginations the moral teachings of 
Gautama have been almost hid from view. The theories grew and 
flourished, each new step, each new hypothesis demanded an- 
other; until the whole sky was filled with forgeries of the brain, 
and the nobler and simpler lessons of the founder of the religion 
were smothered beneath the glittering mass of metaphysical 

179 



subtleties.'* 

This description might well apply to many of the 'sickly imagin- 
ings' and 'forgeries of the brain' which were afflicting Brahminism 
and its offshoots at that time. 

Buddhism had started at a time of social and spiritual revival 
and reform in India. It infused the breath of new life in the people, 
it tapped new sources of popular strength and released new talent 
and capacity for leadership. Under the imperial patronage of 
Ashoka it spread rapidly and became the dominant religion of 
India. It spread also to other countries and there was a constant 
stream of learned Buddhist scholars going abroad from India and 
coming to India. This stream continued for many centuries. When 
the Chinese pilgrim Fa-hien came to India in the fifth century 
A.C., a thousand years after Buddha, he saw that Buddhism was 
flourishing in its parent country. In the seventh century A.C. the 
still more famous pilgrim Hsuan Tsang (or Yuan-Chwang) came 
to India and witnessed signs of decay, although even then it was 
strong in some areas. Quite a large number of Buddhist scholars 
and monks gradually drifted from India to China. 

Meanwhile there had been a revival of Brahminism and a 
great cultural renaissance under the Imperial Guptas in the fourth 
and fifth centuries A.C. This was not anti-Buddhist in any way 
but it certainly increased the importance and power of Brahmin- 
ism, and it was also a reaction against the otherworldliness of 
Buddhism. The later Guptas contended for long against Hun 
invasions and, though they drove them off ultimately, the country 
was weakened and a process of decay set in. There were several 
bright periods subsequently and many remarkable men arose. 
But both Brahminism and Buddhism deteriorated and degrading 
practices grew up in them. It became difficult to distinguish the 
two. If Brahminism absorbed Buddhism, this process changed 
Brahminism also in many ways. 

In the eighth century Shankaracharya, one of the greatest of 
India's philosophers, started religious orders or maths for Hindu 
sanyasins or monks. This was an adoption of the old Buddhist 
practice of the sangha. Previously there had been no such orga- 
nizations of sanyasins in Brahminism, although small groups of 
them existed. 

Some degraded forms of Buddhism continued in East Bengal 
and in Sind in the north-west. Otherwise Buddhism gradually 
vanished from India as a widespread religion. 

The Indian Philosophical Approach 

Though one thought leads to another, each usually related to 
life's changing texture, and a logical movement of the human 

*S. Radhakrishnan, Indian Philosophy, ' Allen & Unwin, London, 1927. 
180 



mind is sometimes discrenible, yet thoughts overlap and the new 
and the old run side by side, irreconcilable and often contra- 
dicting each other. Even an individual's mind is a bundle of 
contradictions and it is difficult to recocnile his action one with 
another. A people, comprising all stages of cultural development, 
represent in themselves and in their thoughts, beliefs, and activities,, 
different ages of the past leading up to the present. Probably their 
activities may conform more to the social and cultural pattern 
of the present day, or else they would be stranded and isolated from 
life's moving stream, but behind these activities lie primitive 
beliefs and unreasoned convictions. It is astonishing to find in 
countries industrially advanced, where every person automatically 
uses or takes advantage of the latest modern discovery or device, 
beliefs and set ideas which reason denies and intelligence cannot 
accept. A politician may of course succeed in his business without 
being a shining example of reason or intelligence. A lawyer may 
be a brilliant advocate and jurist and yet be singularly ignorant 
of other matters. Even a scientist, that typical representative of 
the modern age, often forgets the method and outlook of science 
when he goes out of his study or laboratory. 

This is so even in regard to the problems that affect our daily 
lives in their material aspects. In philosophy and metaphysics 
the problems are more remote, less transient and less connected 
with our day's routine. For most of us they are entirely beyond 
our grasp unless we undergo a rigid discipline and training of 
the mind. And yet all of us have some kind of philosophy of life, 
conscious or unconscious, if not thought out then inherited or 
accepted from others and considered as self-evident. Or we may 
seek refuge from the perils of thought in faith in some religious 
creed or dogma, or in national destiny, or in a vague and com- 
forting humanitarianism. Often all these and others are present 
together, though with little to connect them, and we develop split 
personalities, each functioning in its separate compartment. 

Probably there was more unity and harmony in the human 
personality in the old days, though this was at a lower level than 
to-day except for certain individuals who were obviously of a very 
high type. During this long age of transition, through which huma- 
nity has been passing, we have managed to break up that unity, 
but have not so far succeeded in finding another. We cling still to 
the ways of dogmatic religion, adhere to outworn practices and 
beliefs, and yet talk and presume to live in terms of the scientific 
method. Perhaps science has been too narrow in its approach to 
life and has ignored many vital aspects of it, and hence it could 
not provide a suitable basis for a new unity and harmony. Perhaps 
it is gradually broadening this basis now, and we shall achieve a 
new harmony for the human personality on a much higher level 
than the previous one. But the problem is a more difficult and 

181 



complex one now, for it has grown beyond the limits of the human 
personality. It was perhaps easier to develop some kind of a har- 
monious personality in the restricted spheres of ancient and 
medieval times. In that little world of town and village, with fixed 
concepts of social organization and behaviour, the individual and 
the group lived their self-contained lives, protected, as a rule, 
from outer storms. To-day the sphere of even the individual has 
grown world-wide, and different concepts of social organization 
conflict with each other and behind them are different philosophies 
of life. A strong wind arising somewhere creates a cyclone in one 
place and an anti-cyclone in another. So if harmony is to be 
achieved by the individual, it has to be supported by some kind 
of social harmony throughout the world. 

In India, far more so than elsewhere, the old concept of social 
organization and the philosophy of life underlying it, have per- 
sisted, to some extent, to the present day. They could not have 
done so unless they had some virtue which stabilized society and 
made it conform to life's conditions. And they would not have 
failed ultimately and become a drag and a hindrance, divorced 
from life, if the evil in them had not overcome that virtue. But, 
in any event, they cannot be considered to-day as isolated pheno- 
mena; they must be viewed in that world context and made to 
harmonize with it. 

'In India,' says Havell, 'religion is hardly a dogma, but a working 
hypothesis of human conduct, adapted to different stages of 
spiritual development and different conditions of life. A dogma 
might continue to be believed in, isolated from life, but a working 
hypothesis of human conduct must work and conform to life, or 
it obstructs life. The very raison d'etre of such a hypothesis is its 
workableness, its conformity to life, and its capacity to adapt itself 
to changing conditions. So long as it can do so it serves its purpose 
and performs its allotted function. When it goes off at a tangent 
from the curve of life, loses contact with social needs, and the 
distance between it and life grows, it loses all its vitality and 
significance. 

Metaphysical theories and speculations deal not with the ever- 
changing stuff of life but with the permanent reality behind it, 
if such exists. Hence they have a certain permanence which is 
not affected by external changes. But, inevitably, they are the 
products of the environment in which they grow and of the state 
of development of the human minds that conceived them. If their 
influence spreads they affect the general philosophy of life of a 
people. In India, philosophy, though in its higher reaches confined 
to the elect, has been more pervasive than elsewhere and has had 
a strong influence in moulding the national outlook and in deve- 
loping a certain distinctive attitude of mind. 

Buddhist philosophy played an important part in this process 

182 



and, during the medieval period, Islam left its impress upon the 
national outlook, directly as well as indirectly, through the evolu- 
tion of new sects which sought to bridge the gap between Hinduism 
and the Islamic social and religious structure. But, in the main, 
the dominating influence has been that of the six systems of Indian 
philosophy, or darshanas, as they are called. Some of these systems 
were themselves greatly affected by Buddhist thought. All of 
them are considered orthodox and yet they vary in their approach 
and their conclusions, though they have many common ideas. 
There is polytheism, and theism with a personal God, and pure 
monism, and a system which ignores God altogether and bases itself 
on a theory of evolution. There is both idealism and realism. 
The various facets of the complex and inclusive Indian mind are 
shown in their unity and diversity. Max Miiller drew attention 
to both these factors: ' . . . the more have I become impressed 
with the truth... that there is behind the variety of the six systems 
a common fund of what may be called national and popular 
philosophy., .from which each thinker was allowed to draw for 
his own purposes.' 

There is a common presumption in all of them: that the uni- 
verse is orderly and functions according to law, that there is a 
mighty rhythm about it. Some such presumption becomes necessary, 
for otherwise there could hardly be any system to explain it. 
Though the law of causality, of cause and effect, functions, yet 
there is a measure of freedom to the individual to shape his own 
destiny. There is belief in rebirth and an emphasis on unselfish 
love and disinterested activity. Logic and reason are relied upon 
and used effectively for argument, but it is recognised that often 
intuition is greater than either. The general argument proceeds 
on a rational basis, in so far as reason can be applied to matters 
often outside its scope. Professor Keith has pointed out that 'The 
systems are indeed orthodox and admit the authority of the sacred 
scriptures, but they attack the problems of existence with human 
means, and scripture serves for all practical purposes but to lend 
sanctity to results which are achieved not only without its aid, but 
often in very dubious harmony with its tenets.' 

The Six Systems of Philosophy 

The early beginnings of the Indian systems of philosophy take 
us back to the pre-Buddhist era. They develop gradually, the 
Brahminical systems side by side with the Buddhist, often criti- 
cizing each other, often borrowing from one another. Before the 
beginning of the Christian era, six Brahminical systems had taken 
shape and crystallized themselves, out of the welter of many such 
systems. Each one of them represents an independent approach, 
a separate argument, and yet they were not isolated from each 

183 



other but rather parts of a larger plan. 

The six systems are known as: (1) Nyaya, (2) Vaishesika, (3) 
Samkhya, (4) Toga, (5) MimUmsa, and (6) Vedanta. 

The Nyaya method is analytic and logical. In fact Nyaya means 
logic or the science of right reasoning. It is similar in many ways 
to Aristotle's syllogisms, though there are also fundamental dif- 
ferences between the two. The principles underlying Nyaya 
logic were accepted by all the other systems, and, as a kind of 
mental discipline, Nyaya has been taught throughout the ancient 
and medieval periods and up to to-day in India's schools and 
universities. Modern education in India has discarded it, but 
wherever Sanskrit is taught in the old way, Nyaya is still an essen- 
tial part of the curriculum. It was not only considered an indispens- 
able preparation for the study of philosophy, but a necessary mental 
training for every educated person. It has had at least as important 
a place in the old scheme of Indian education as Aristotle's logic 
has had in European education. 

The method was, of course, very different from the modern 
scientific method of objective investigation. Nevertheless, it was 
critical and scientific in its own way, and, instead of relying on 
faith, tried to examine the objects of knowledge critically and to 
proceed step by step by methods of logical proof. There was some 
faith behind it, certain presumptions which were not capable of 
logical treatment. Having accepted some hypotheses the system 
was built up on those foundations. It was presumed that there is 
a rhythm and unity in life and nature. There was belief in a 
personal God, in individual souls, and an atomic universe. The 
individual was neither the soul alone nor the body, but the product 
of their union. Reality was supposed to be a complex of souls 
and nature. 

The Vaishesika system resembles the Nyaya in many ways. It 
emphasizes the separateness of individual selves and objects, and 
develops the atomic theory of the universe. The principle of 
dharma, the moral law, is said to govern the universe, and round 
this the whole system revolves. The hypothesis of a God is not 
clearly admitted. Between the Nyaya and Vaisheshika systems 
and early Buddhist philosophy there are many points of contact. 
On the whole they adopt a realistic approach. 

The Samkhya system, which Kapila (c. seventh century B.C.) is 
said to have shaped out of many early and pre-Buddhist currents 
of thought, is remarkable. According to Richard Garbe: 'In 
Kapila's doctrine, for the first time in the history of the world, the 
complete independence and freedom of the human mind, its full 
confidence in its own powers, were exhibited.' 

The Samkhya became a well-co-ordinated system after the rise 
of Buddhism. The theory is a purely philosophical and meta- 
physical conception arising out of the mind of man and having 

184 



little to do with objective observation. Indeed, such observation 
was not possible in matters beyond its reach. Like Buddhism, 
Samkhya proceeded along rationalistic lines of inquiry and met 
the challenge of Buddhism on the latter's own ground of reasoned 
argument without support of authority. Because of this rationalistic 
approach, God had to be ruled out. In SSmkhya thus there is 
neither a personal God nor an impersonal one, neither mono- 
theism nor monism. Its approach was atheistic and it undermined 
the foundations of a supernatural religion. There is no creation 
of the universe by a god, but rather a constant evolution, the 
product of interaction between spirit, or rather spirits, and matter, 
though that matter itself is of the nature of energy. This evolution 
is a continuous process. 

The Samkhya is called dvaita, or a dualistic philosophy, because 
it builds its structure on two primary causes: prakriti, or an ever- 
active and changing nature or energy, and purusha, the spirit which 
does not change. There is an infinite number ofpurushas or souls, 
or something in the nature of consciousness. Under the influence 
of purusha, which itself is inactive, prakriti evolves and leads to 
the world of continuous becoming. Causality is accepted, but it 
is said that the effect really exists hidden in the cause. Cause and 
effect become the undeveloped and developed states of one and 
the same thing. From our practical point of view, however, cause 
and effect are different and distinct, but basically there is an iden- 
tity between them. And so the argument goes on, showing how 
from the unmanifested prakriti or energy, through the influence 
of purusha or consciousness, and the principle of causality, nature 
with its immense complexity and variety of elements has developed 
and is ever changing and developing. Between the lowest and the 
highest in the universe there is a continuity and a unity. The 
whole conception is metaphysical, and the argument, based on 
certain hypotheses, is long, intricate, and reasoned. 

The Toga system of Patanjali is essentially a method for the 
discipline of the body and the mind leading up to psychic and 
spiritual training. Patanjali not only crystallized this old system 
but also wrote a famous commentary on Panini's Sanskrit gram- 
mar. This commentary, called the 'Mahabhashya' is as much of 
a classic as Panini's work. Professor Stcherbatsky, of Leningrad, 
has written that 'the ideal scientific wrok for India is the grammar 
of Panini with the Mahabhashya of Patanjali.'* 

Yoga is a word well known now in Europe and America, though 
little understood, and it is associated with quaint practices, more 
especially with sitting Buddha-like and gazing on one's navel or 

* It is not established that Patanjali, the grammarian, was the same person as Patanjali, the 
author of the 'Toga Sutras.' The grammarian's date is definitely known — second century 
B.C. Some people are of opinion that the author of the 'Toga Sutras' was a different person 
and lived two or three hundred years later. 

185 



the tip of one's nose.* Some people learning odd tricks of the 
body presume to become authorities on the subject in the West, 
and impress and exploit the credulous and the seekers after the 
sensational. The system is much more than these devices and is 
based on the psychological conception that by proper training of 
the mind certain higher levels of consciousness can be 
reached. It is meant to be a method for finding out things for 
oneself rather than a preconceived metaphysical theory of reality 
or of the universe. It is thus experimental and the most suitable 
conditions for carrying out the experiment are pointed out. As 
such a method it can be adopted and used by any system of philo- 
sophy, whatever its theoretical approach may be. Thus the adherents 
of the atheistic Samkhya philosophy may use this method. Bud- 
dhism developed its own forms of Yoga training, partly similar, 
pardy different. The theoretical parts of Patanjali's Yoga system 
are therefore of relatively small importance; it is the method that 
counts. Belief in God is no integral part of the system, but it is 
suggested that such belief in a personal God, and devotion to him, 
helps in concentrating the mind and thus serves a practical purpose. 
The later stages of Yoga are supposed to lead to some kind of 
intuitive insight or to a condition of ecstasy, such as the mystics 
speak of. Whether this is some kind of higher mental state, open- 
ing the door to further knowledge, or is merely a kind of self- 
hypnosis, I do not know. Even if the former is possible, the latter 
fcertainly also happens, and it is well-known that unregulated 
Yoga has sometimes led to unfortunate consequences so far as the 
mind of the person is concerned. 

But before these final stages of meditation and contemplation 
are reached, there is the discipline of the body and mind to be 
practised. The body should be fit and healthy, supple and graceful, 
hard and strong. A number of bodily exercises are prescribed, as 
also ways of breathing, in order to have some control over it and 
normally to take deep and long breaths. 'Exercises' is the wrong 
word, for they involve no strenuous movement. They are rather 
postures — asanas as they are called — and, properly done, they 
relax and tone up the body and do not tire it at all. This old and 
typical Indian method of preserving bodily fitness is rather re- 
markable when one compares it with the more usual methods 
involving rushing about, jerks, hops, and jumps which leave one 
panting, out of breath, and tired out. These other methods have 
also been common enough in India, as have wrestling, swimming, 
riding, fencing, archery, Indian clubs, something in the nature 
ofju-jitsu, and many other pastimes and games. But the old asana 
method is perhaps more typical of India and seems to fit in with 
the spirit of her philosophy. There is a poise in it and an unruffled 

* The word 'Toga' means union. Possibly it is derived from the same root as the English 
word 'yoke'— joining. 

186 



calm even while it exercises the body. Strength and fitness are 
gained without any waste of energy or disturbance of the mind. 
And because of this the asanas are suited to any age and some of 
them can be performed even by the old. 

There are a large number of these asanas. For many years now 
I have practised a few simple selected ones, whenever I have had 
the chance, and I have no doubt that I have profited greatly by 
them, living as I often did in environments unfavourable to the 
mind and body. These and some breathing exercises are the extent 
of my practice of the physical exercises of the Yoga system. I have 
not gone beyond the elementary stages of the body, and my 
mind continues to be an unruly member, misbehaving far too 
often. 

The discipline of the body, which includes eating and drinking 
the right things and avoiding the wrong ones, is to be accompanied 
by what the Yoga system describes as ethical preparation. This 
includes non-violence, truthfulness, continence, etc. Non-violence 
or ahimsa is something much more than abstention from physical 
violence. It is an avoidance of malice and hatred. 

All this is supposed to lead to a control of the senses; then comes 
contemplation and meditation, and finally intense concentration, 
which should lead to various kinds of intuition. 

Vivekananda, one of the greatest of the modern exponents of 
Yoga and the Vedanta, has laid repeated stress on the experi- 
mental character of Yoga and on basing it on reason. 'No one 
of these Yogas gives up reason, no one asks you to be hood- winked 
or to deliver your reason into the hands of priests of any type 

whatsoever Each one of them tells you to cling to your reason, 

to hold fast to it.' Though the spirit of Yoga and the Vedanta 
may be akin to the spirit of science, it is true that they deal with 
different media, and hence vital differences creep in. According 
to the Yoga, the spirit is not limited to the intelligence, and also 
'thought is action, and only action can make thought of any value.' 
Inspiration and intuition are recognized but may they not lead 
to deception? Vivekananda answers that inspiration must not 
contradict reason: 'What we call inspiration is the development 
of reason. The way to intuition is through reason... .No genuine 
inspiration ever contradicts reason. Where it does it is no inspira- 
tion.' Also 'inspiration must be for the good of one and all; and 
not for name or fame or personal gain. It should always be for the 
good of the world, and perfectly unselfish.' 

Again, 'Experience is the only source of knowledge.' The same 
methods of investigation which we apply to the sciences and to 
exterior knowledge should be applied to religion. 'If a religion 
is destroyed by such investigation it was nothing but a useless 
and unworthy superstition; the sooner it disappeared the better.' 
'Why religions should claim that they are not bound to abide 

187 



by the standpoint of reason no one knows... .For it is better that 
mankind should become atheist by following reason than blindly 
believe in two hundred million gods on the authority of anybody. . .. 
Perhaps there are prophets, who have passed the limits of sense 
and obtained a glimpse of the beyond. We shall believe it only 
when we can do the same ourselves; not before.' It is said that 
reason is not strong enough, that often it makes mistakes. If reason 
is weak why should a body of priests be considered any better 
guides? 'I will abide by my reason,' continues Vivekananda, 
'because with all its weakness there is some chance of my getting 
at truth through it... .We should therefore follow reason, and 
also sympathise with those who do not come to any sort of belief, 
following reason.' 'In the study of this Raja Yoga no faith or belief 
is necessary. Believe nothing until you find it out for yourself.'* 
Vivekananda's unceasing stress on reason and his refusal to 
take anything on trust derived from his passionate belief in the 
freedom of the mind and also because he had seen the evils of 
authority in his own country: 'for I was born in a country where 
they have gone to the extreme of authority.' He interpreted — 
and he had the right to interpret — the old Yoga systems and the 
Ved5nta accordingly. But, however much experiment and reason 
may be at the back of them, they deal with regions which are 
beyond the reach or even the understanding of the average man — 
a realm of psychical and psychological experiences entirely dif- 
ferent from the world we know and are used to. Those experi- 
ments and experiences have certainly not been confined to India, 
and there is abundant evidence of them in the records of Christian 
mystics, Persian Sufis, and others. It is extraordinary how these 
experiences resemble each other, demonstrating, as Romain 
Rolland says, 'the universality and perennial occurrence of the 
great facts of religious experience, their close resemblance under 
the diverse costumes of race and time, attesting to the persistent 
unity of the human spirit — or rather, for it goes deeper than the 
spirit, which is itself obliged to delve for it — to the identity of the 
materials constituting humanity.' 

Yoga, then, is an experimental system of probing into the 
psychical background of the individual and thus developing cer- 
tain perceptions and control of the mind. How far this can be 
utilised to advantage by modern psychology, I do not know; 
but some attempt to do so seems worth while. Aurobindo Ghose 
has defined Yoga as follows: 'All Raj a- Yoga depends on this 
perception and experience — that our inner elements, combina- 
tions, functions, forces, can be separated or dissolved, can be 
newly combined and set to novel and formerly impossible uses, 

* Most of the extracts from Vivekananda's writings have been taken from Romain Rolland's 
'Life of Vivekananda. ' 

188 



or can be transformed and resolved into a new general synthesis 
by fixed internal processes.' 

The next system of philosophy is known as the Mimamsa. This 
is ritualistic and tends towards polytheism. Modern popular 
Hinduism as well as Hindu Law have been largely influenced by 
this system and its rules which lay down the dharma or the scheme 
of right living as conceived by it. It might be noted that the poly- 
theism of the Hindus is of a curious variety, for the devas, the shin- 
ing ones or gods, for all their special powers are supposed to be of 
a lower order of creation than man. Both the Hindus and Buddhists 
believe that human birth is the highest stage that the Being has 
reached on the road to self-realization. Even the devas can only 
achieve this freedom and realization through human birth. This 
conception is evidently far removed from normal polytheism. 
Buddhists say that only man can attain the supreme consummation 
of Buddhahood. 

Sixthly and lastly in this series comes the Vedanta system, which, 
arising out of the Upanishads, developed and took many shapes 
and forms, but was always based on a monistic philosophy of the 
universe. The purusha and prakriti of the Samkhya are not consi- 
dered as independent substances but as modifications of a single 
reality — the absolute. On the foundation of the early Vedanta, 
Shankara (or Shankaracharya) built a system which is called the 
Advaita Vedanta or non-dualist Vedanta. It is this philosophy which 
represents the dominant philosophic outlook of Hinduism to-day. 

It is based on pure monism, the only ultimate reality in the 
metaphysical sense being the Atman, the Absolute Soul. That is 
the subject, all else is objective. How that Absolute Soul pervades 
everything, how the one appears as the many, and yet retains its 
wholeness, for the Absolute is indivisible and cannot be divided, 
all this cannot be accounted for by the processes of logical reason- 
ing, for our minds are limited by the finite world. The Upanishad 
had described this Atman, if this can be called a description thus: 
'Whole is that, whole (too) is this; from whole, whole cometh; 
take whole from whole, (yet) whole remains.' 

Shankara builds a subtle and intricate theory of knowledge and 
proceeding from certain assumptions, step by step, by logical argu- 
ment, leads up to the complete system of advaitism or non- 
dualism. The individual soul is not a separate entity but that 
Absolute Soul itself though limited in some ways. It is compared 
to the space enclosed in a jar, the Atman being universal space. 
For practical purposes they may be treated as distinct from one 
another but this distinction is apparent only, not real. Freedom 
consists in realizing this unity, this oneness of the individual with 
the Absolute Soul. 

The phenomenal world we see about us thus becomes a mere 
reflection of that reality, or a shadow cast by it on the empirical 

189 



plane. It has been called Mayi, which has been mistranslated as 
'illusion.' But it is not non-existence. It is an intermediate form 
between Being and non-Being. It is a kind of relative existence, 
and so perhaps the conception of relativity brings us nearer to 
the meaning of May&. What is good and evil then in this world? 
Are they also mere reflections and shadows with no substance? 
Whatever they may be in the ultimate analysis in this empirical 
world of ours there is a validity and importance in these ethical 
distinctions. They are relevant where individuals function as such. 

These finite individuals cannot imagine the infinite without 
limiting it; they can only form limited and objective conceptions 
of it. Yet even these finite forms and concepts rest ultimately in 
the infinite and Absolute. Hence the form of religion becomes a 
relative affair and each individual has liberty to form such con- 
ceptions as he is capable of. 

Shankara accepted the Brahminical organization of social life 
on the caste basis, as representing the collective experience and 
wisdom of the race. But he held that any person belonging to any 
caste could attain the highest knowledge. 

There is about Shankara's attitude and philosophy a sense of 
world negation and withdrawal from the normal activities of the 
world in search for that freedom of the self which was to him the 
final goal for every person. There is also a continual insistence 
on self-sacrifice and detachment. 

And yet Shankara was a man ofamazing energy and vast activity. 
He was no escapist retiring into his shell or into a corner of the 
forest, seeking his own individual perfection and oblivious of 
what happened to others. Born in Malabar in the far south of India, 
he travelled incessantly all over India, meeting innumerable people, 
arguing, debating, reasoning, convincing, and filling them with 
a part of his own passion and tremendous vitality. He was evi- 
dently a man who was intensely conscious of his mission, a man 
who looked upon the whole of India from Cape Comorin to the 
Himalayas as his field of action and as something that held to- 
gether culturally and was infused by the same spirit, though this 
might take many external forms. He strove hard to synthesize 
the diverse currents that were troubling the mind of India of his 
day and to build a unity of outlook out of that diversity. In a 
brief life of thirty-two years he did the work of many long lives and 
left such an impress of his powerful mind and rich personality 
on India that it is very evident to-day. He was a curious mixture 
of a philosopher and a scholar, an agnostic and a mystic, a poet 
and a saint, and in addition to all this, a practical reformer and an 
able organizer. He built up, for the first time within the Brahminical 
fold, ten religious orders and of these four are very much alive 
to-day. He established four great maths or monasteries, locating 
them far from each other, almost at the fojir corners of India. 

190 



One of these was in the south at Sringeri in Mysore, another at 
Puri on the east coast, the third at Dvaraka in Kathiawad on the 
west coast, and the fourth at Badrinath in the heart of the Hima- 
layas. At the age of thirty-two this Brahmin from the tropical 
south died at Kedarnath in the upper snow-covered reaches of 
the Himalayas. 

There is a significance about these long journeys of Shankara 
throughout this vast land at a time when travel was difficult and 
the means of transport very slow and primitive. The very concep- 
tion of these journeys, and his meeting kindred souls everywhere 
and speaking to them in Sanskrit, the common language of the 
learned throughout India, brings out the essential unity of India 
even in those far-off days. Such journeys could not have been 
uncommon then or earlier, people went to and fro in spite of 
political divisions, new books travelled, and every new thought or 
fresh theory spread rapidly over the entire country and became 
the subject of interested talk and often of heated debate. There 
was not only a common intellectual and cultural life among the 
educated people, but vast numbers of common folk were conti- 
nually travelling to the numerous places of pilgrimage, spread 
out all over the land and famous from epic times. 

All this going to and fro and meeting people from different 
parts of the country must have intensified the conception of a 
common land and a common culture. This travelling was not 
confined to the upper castes; among the pilgrims were men and 
women of all castes and classes. Whatever the religious signi- 
ficance of these pilgrimages in the minds of the people might have 
been, they were looked upon also, as they are to-day, as holiday- 
time and opportunities for merry-making and seeing different 
parts of the country. Every place of pilgrimage contained a cross- 
section of the people of India in all their great variety of custom, 
dress, and language, and yet very conscious of their common 
features and the bonds that held them together and brought all 
of them to meet in one place. Even the difference of language 
between the north and the south did not prove a formidable barrier 
to this intercourse. 

All this was so then and Shankara was doubtless fully aware 
of it. It would seem that Shankara wanted to add to this sense 
of national unity and common consciousness. He functioned on 
the intellectual, philosophical and religious plane and tried to 
bring about a greater unity of thought all over the country. He 
functioned also on the popular plane in many ways, destroying 
many a dogma and opening the door of his philosophic sanctuary 
to every one who was capable of entering it. By locating his four 
great monasteries in the north, south, east, and west, he evidently 
wanted to encourage the conception of a culturally united India. 
These four places had been previously places of pilgrimage from 

191 



all parts of the country, and now became more so. 

How well the ancient Indians chose their sacred places of 
pilgrimage! Almost always they are lovely spots with beautiful 
natural surroundings. There is the icy cave of Amaranath in 
Kashmir, and there is the temple of the Virgin Goddess right at 
the southern tip of India at Rameshwaram, near Cape Comorin. 
There is Benares, of course, and Hardwar, nestling at the foot of 
the Himalayas, where the Ganges flows out of its tortuous moun- 
tain valleys into the plains below, and Prayaga (or Allahabad) 
where the Ganges meets the Jumna, and Mathura and Brindaban 
by the Jumna, round which the Krishna legends cluster, and Budh 
Gaya where Buddha is said to have attained enlightenment, and 
so many places in the south. Many of the old temples, especially 
in the south, contain famous sculptures and other artistic remains. 
A visit to many of the places of pilgrimage thus gives an insight 
into old Indian art. 

Shankara is said to have helped in putting an end to Buddhism 
in India as a widespread religion, and that thereafter Brahminism 
absorbed it in a fraternal embrace. But Buddhism had shrunk in 
India even before Shankara's time. Some of Shankara's Brahmin 
opponents called him a disguised Buddhist. It is true that Bud- 
dhism influenced him considerably. 

India and China 

It was through Buddhism that China and India came near to each 
other and developed many contacts. Whether there were any 
such contacts before Ashoka's reign we do not know; probably 
there was some sea-borne trade, for silk used to come from China. 
Yet there must have been overland contacts and migrations of 
peoples in far earlier periods, for Mongoloid features are common 
in the eastern border areas of India. In Nepal these are very marked. 
In Assam (Kamarupa of old) and Bengal they are often evident. 
Historically speaking, however, Ashoka's missionaries blazed the 
trail and, as Buddhism spread in China, there began that long 
succession of pilgrims and scholars who journeyed between India 
and China for 1,000 years. They travelled overland across the 
Gobi Desert and the plains and mountains of Central Asia and 
over the Himalayas — a long, hard journey full of peril. Many 
Indians and Chinese perished on the way, and one account says 
that as many as 90 per cent of these pilgrims perished. Many 
having managed to reach the end of their journey did not return 
and settled in the land of their adoption. There was another route 
also, not much safer, though probably shorter: this was by sea 
via Indo-China, Java, and Sumatra, Malaya and the Nicobar 
Islands. This was also frequently used, and sometimes a pilgrim 
travelled overland and returned by sea. Buddhism and Indian 



192 



culture had spread all over Central Asia and in parts of Indo- 
nesia, and there were large numbers of monasteries and study 
centres dotted all over these vast areas. Travellers from India 
or China thus found a welcome and shelter along these routes 
by land and sea. Sometimes scholars from China would break 
journey for a few months at some Indian colony in Indonesia in 
order to learn Sanskrit before they came to India. 

The first record of an Indian scholar's visit to China is that of 
Kashyapa Matanga who reached China in 67 A.D. in the reign 
of the Emperor Ming Ti and probably at his invitation. He settled 
down at Lo Yang by the Lo river. Dharmaraksha accompanied 
him and, in later years, among the noted scholars who went 
were Buddhabhadra, Jinabhadra, Kumarajiva, Paramartha, 
Jinagupta, and Bodhidharma. Each one of these took a group of 
monks or disciples with him. It is said that at one time (sixth 
century A.C.) there were more than 3,000 Indian Buddhist monks 
and 10,000 Indian families in the Lo Yang province alone. 

These Indian scholars who went to China not only carried 
many Sanskrit manuscripts with them, which they translated 
into Chinese, but some of them also wrote original books in the 
Chinese language. They made quite a considerable contribution 
to Chinese literature, including poetry. Kumarajiva who went 
to China in 401 A.C., was a prolific writer and as many as forty- 
seven different books written by him have come down to us. His 
Chinese style is supposed to be very good. He translated the life 
of the great Indian scholar Nagarjuna into Chinese. Jinagupta 
went to China in the second half of the sixty century A.C. He 
translated thirty-seven original Sanskrit works into Chinese. 
His great knowledge was so much admired that an emperor of the 
T'ang dynasty became his disciple. 

There was two-way traffic between India and China and 
many Chinese scholars came here. Among the best known who 
have left records of their journeys are Fa Hien (or Fa Hsien), 
Sung Yun, Hsuan-Tsang (or Chwen Chuang), and I-Tsing (or 
Yi-Tsing). Fa Hien came to India in the fifth century; he was 
a disciple of Kumarajiva in China. There is an interesting account 
of what Kumarajiva told him on the eve of his departure for India, 
when he went to take leave of his teacher. Kumarajiva charged 
him not to spend all his time in gathering religious knowledge 
only but to study in some detail the life and habits of the people 
of India, so that China might understand them and their country 
as a whole. Fa Hien studied at Pataliputra university. 

The most famous of the Chinese travellers to India was Hsuan- 
Tsang who came in the seventh century when the great T'ang 
dynasty flourished in China and Harshavardhana ruled over 
an empire in North India. Hsuan-Tsang came overland across 
the Gobi Desert and passing Turfan and Kucha, Taskhand and 

193 



Samarkand, Balkh, Khotan and Yarkand, crossed the Himalayas 
into India. He tells us of his many adventures, of the perils he 
overcame, of the Buddhist rulers and monasteries in Central Asia, 
and of the Turks there who were ardent Buddhists. In India he 
travelled all over the country, greatly honoured and respected 
everywhere, making accurate observations of places and peoples, 
and noting down some delightful and some fantastic stories that he 
heard. Many years he spent at the great Nalanda University, 
not far from Pataliputra, which was famous for its many-sided 
learning and attracted students from far corners of the country. 
It is said that as many as 10,000 students and monks were in 
residence there. Hsuan-Tsang took the degree of Master of the 
Law there and finally became vice-principal of the university. 

Hsuan-Tsang's book the Si-Yu-Ki or the Record of the 
Western Kingdom (meaning India), makes fascinating reading. 
Coming from a highly civilized and sophisticated country, at a 
time when China's capital Si-an-fu was a centre of art and 
learning, his comments on and descriptions of conditions in 
India are valuable. He tells us of the system of education which 
began early and proceeded by stages to the university where the 
five branches of knowledge taught were: (1) Grammar, (2) 
Science of Arts and Crafts, (3) Medicine, (4) Logic, and (5) 
Philosophy. He was particularly struck by the love of learning 
of the Indian people. Some kind of primary education was 
fairly widespread as all the monks and priests were teachers, 
Of the people he says: 'With respect to the ordinary people, 
although they are naturally light-minded, yet they are upright 
and honourable. In money matters they are without craft, and 
in administering justice they are considerate. . . .They are not 
deceitful or treacherous in their conduct, and are faithful in 
their oaths and promises. In their rules of government there is 
remarkable rectitude, whilst in their behaviour there is much 
gentleness and sweetness. With respect to criminals or rebels, 
these are few in number, and only occasionally troublesome.' 
He says further: As the administration of the government is 

founded on benign principles, the executive is simple People 

are not subject to forced labour... .In this way taxes on people 

are light The merchants who engage in commerce come 

and go in carrying out their transactions.' 

Hsuan-Tsang returned the way he came, via Central Asia, 
carrying a large number of manuscripts with him. From his 
account one gathers a vivid impression of the wide sway of 
Buddhism in Khorasan, Iraq, Mosul, and right up to the frontiers 
of Syria. And yet this was a time when Buddhism was in decay 
there and Islam, already beginning in Arabia, was soon to spread 
out over all these lands. About the Iranian people, Hsuan-Tsang 
makes an interesting observation: they 'care not for learning, 

194 



but give themselves entirely to works of art. All they make the 
neighbouring countries value very much.' 

Iran then, as before and after, concentrated on adding to the 
beauty and grace of life, and its influence spread far in Asia. 
Of the strange little kingdom of Turfan, on the edge of the 
Gobi Desert, Hsuan-Tsang tells us, and we have learned more 
about it in recent years from the work of archaeologists. Here 
many cultures came and mixed and coalesced, producing a rich 
combination which drew its inspiration from China and India 
and Persia and even Hellenic sources. The language was Indo- 
European, derived from India and Iran, and resembling in some 
ways the Celtic languages of Europe; the religion came from 
India; the ways of life were Chinese; many of the artistic wares 
they had were from Iran. The statues and frescoes of the Buddhas 
and gods and goddesses, beautifully made, have often Indian 
draperies and Grecian headdresses. These goddesses, says Monsieur 
Grousset, represent 'the happiest combination of Hindu supple- 
ness, Hellenic eloquence, and Chinese charm.' 

Hsuan-Tsang went back to his homeland, welcomed by his 
Emperor and his people, and settled down to write his book 
and translate the many manuscripts he had brought. When he 
had started on his journey, many years earlier, there is a story 
that the Emperor T'ang mixed a handful of dust in a drink and 
offered this to him, saying: 'You would do well to drink this cup, 
for are we not told that a handful of one's country's soil is worth 
more than ten thousand pounds of foreign gold?' 

Hsuan-Tsang's visit to India and the great respect in which 
he was held both in China and India led to the establishment 
of political contacts between the rulers of the two countries. 
Harshavardhana of Kanauj and the T'ang Emperor exchanged 
embassies. Hsuan-Tsang himself remained in touch with India, 
exchanging letters with friends there and receiving manuscripts. 
Two interesting letters, originally written in Sanskrit, have been 
preserved in China. One of these was written in 654 A.C. by an 
Indian Buddhist scholar, Sthavira Prajnadeva, to Hsuan-Tsang. 
After greeting and news about common friends and their literary 
work, he proceeds to say: 'We are sending you a pair of white 
cloths to show that we are not forgetful. The road is long, so do 
not mind the smallness of the present. We wish you may accept 
it. As regards the Sutras and Shastras which you may require 
please send us a list. We will copy them and send them to you.' 
Hsuan-Tsang in his reply says: 'I learnt from an ambassador 
who recently came back from India that the great teacher Shila- 
bhadra was no mor e. Th is news overwhelmed me with grief 

that knew no bounds Among the Sutras and Shastras that 

I, Hsuan-Tsang, had brought with me I have already translated 
the Yogacharyabhumi-Shastra and other works, in all thirty 

195 



volumes. I should humbly let you know that while crossing the 
Indus I had lost a load of sacred texts. I now send you a list of the 
texts annexed to this letter. I request you to send them to me if 
you get the chance. I am sending some small articles as presents. 
Please accept them.'* 

Hsuan-Tsang has told us much of Nalanda university, and 
there are other accounts of it also. Yet when I went, some years 
ago, and saw the excavated ruins of Nalanda I was amazed at 
their extent and the huge scale on which it was planned. Only 
a part of it has so far been uncovered, and over the rest there 
are inhabited localities, but even this part consisted of huge 
courts surrounded by stately buildings in stone. 

Soon after Hsuan-Tsang's death in China, yet another famous 
Chinese pilgrim made the journey to India — I-tsing (or Yi-tsing). 
He started in 671 A.C., and it took him nearly two years to reach 
the Indian port of Tamralipti, at the mouth of the Hooghly. 
For he came by sea and stopped for many months at Shribhoga 
(modern Palembang in Sumatra) to study Sanskrit. This journey 
of his by sea has a certain significance, for it is probable that 
there were disturbed conditions in Central Asia then and political 
changes were taking place. Many of the friendly Buddhist mona- 
steries that dotted the land route may have ceased to exist.. It is 
also likely that the sea route was more convenient with the growth 
of Indian colonies in Indonesia, and constant trade and other 
contacts between India and these countries. It appears from his 
and other accounts that there was at that time regular navigation 
between Persia (Iran), India, Malaya, Sumatra, and China. 
I-tsing sailed in a Persian ship from Kwangtung, and went first 
to Sumatra. 

I-tsing also studied at Nalanda university for a long time and 
carried back with him several hundred Sanskrit texts. He was 
chiefly interested in the fine points of Buddhist ritual and cere- 
monial and has written in detail about them. But he tells us 
much also about customs, clothes, and food. Wheat was the 
staple diet in North India, as now, and rice in the south and the 
east. Meat was sometimes eaten, but this was rare. (I-tsing pro- 
bably tells us more about the Buddhist monks than about others). 
Ghee (clarified butter), oil, milk, and cream were found every- 
where, and cakes and fruits were abundant. I-tsing noted the 
importance that Indians have always attached to a certain cere- 
monial purity. 'Now the first and chief difference between India 
of the five regions and other nations is the peculiar distinction 
between purity and impurity.' Also: 'To preserve what has been 
left from the meal, as is done in China, is not at all in accordance 
with Indian rules.' 

I-tsing refers to India generally as the West (Si-fang), but he 

*Quoted in 'India and China' by Dr. P. C. Bagchi (Calcutta, 1944). 
196 



tells us that it was known as Aryadesha - ' the Aryadesha'; 'arya' 
means noble, 'desha' region — the noble region, a name for the 
west. It is so called because men of noble character appear there 
successively, and people all praise the land by that name. It is 
also called Madhyadesha, i.e., the middle land, for it is the centre 
of a hundred myriads of countries. The people are all familiar with 
this name. The northern tribes (Hu or Mongols or Turks) alone 
call the Noble Land 'Hindu' (Hsin-tu), but this is not at all a 
common name; it is only a vernacular name, and has no special 
significance. The people of India do not know this designation, 
and the most suitable name for India is the 'Noble Land.' 

I-tsing's reference to 'Hindu' is interesting. He goes on to say: 
'Some say that Indu means the moon, and the Chinese name for 
India, i.e., Indu (Yin-tu), is derived from it. Although it might 
mean this, it is nevertheless not the common name. As for the 
Indian name for the Great Chou (China), i.e., Cheena, it is 
a name and has no special meaning.' He also mentions the Sanskrit 
names for Korea and other countries. 

For all his admiration for India and many things Indian, 
I-tsing made it clear that he gave first place to his native land, 
China. India might be the 'noble region,' but China was the 
'divine land.' 'The people of the five parts of India are proud 
of their own purity and excellence. But high refinement, lite- 
rary elegance, propriety, moderation, ceremonies of welcoming 
and parting, the delicious taste of food, and the richness of benevo- 
lence and righteousness are found in China only, and no other 
country can excel her.' 'In the healing arts of acupuncture and 
cautery and the skill of feeling the pulse, China has never been 
superseded by any part of India; the medicament for prolonging 
life is only found in China. .. .From the character of men and 
the quality of things China is called the "divine land". Is there 
anyone in the five parts of India who does not admire China?' 

The word used in the old Sanskrit for the Chinese Emperor 
is deva-putra, which is an exact translation of 'Son of Heaven'. 

I-tsing, himself a fine scholar in Sanskrit, praises the language 
and says it is respected in far countries in the north and south. 
... 'How much more then should people of the divine land 
(China), as well as the celestial store house (India), teach the real 
rules of the language!'* 

Sanskrit scholarship must have been fairly widespread in China. 
It is interesting to find that some Chinese scholars tried to introduce 
Sanskrit phonetics into the Chinese language. A well-known 
example of this is that of the monk Shon Wen, who lived at the 
time of the T'ang dynasty. He tried to develop an alphabetical 
system along these lines in Chinese. 

* These extracts have been taken from J. Takakusu's translation of I-Tsing's: A record 
of the Buddhist Religions as practised in India and Malay Archipelago ' (Oxford, 1896). 

197 



With the decay of Buddhism in India this Indo-Chinese com- 
merce of scholars practically ceased, though pilgrims from China 
occasionally came to visit the holy places of Buddhism in India. 
During the political revolutions from the eleventh century A.C. 
onwards, crowds of Buddhist monks, carrying bundles of manus- 
cripts, went to Nepal or crossed the Himalayas, into Tibet. A 
considerable part of old Indian literature thus and previously, 
found its way to China and Tibet and in recent years it has been 
discovered afresh there in the original or more frequently, in 
translations. Many Indian classics have been preserved in Chinese 
and Tibetan translations relating not only to Buddhism but also 
to Brahminism, astronomy, mathematics, medicine, etc. There 
are supposed to be 8,000 such works in the Sung-pao collection 
in China. Tibet is full of them. There used to be frequent co- 
operation between Indian, Chinese, and Tibetan scholars. A 
notable instance of this co-operation, still extant, is a Sanskrit- 
Tibetan-Chinese dictionary of Buddhist technical terms. This 
dates from the ninth or tenth century AC. and is named the 
' M ahavyutpatti.' 

Among the most ancient printed books discovered in China, 
dating from the eighth century A.C., are books in Sanskrit. These 
were printed from wooden blocks. In the tenth century the 
Imperial Printing Commission was organized in China and as a 
result of this, and right up to the Sung era, the art of printing 
developed rapidly. It is surprising and difficult to account for 
that, in spite of the close contacts between Indian and Chinese 
scholars and their exchanges ofbooks and manuscripts for hundreds 
of years, there is no evidence whatever of the printing of books 
in India during that period. Block printing went to Tibet from 
China at some early period and, I believe, it is still practised there. 
Chinese printing was introduced into Europe during the Mongol 
or Yuan dynasty (1260-1368). First known in Germany, it spread 
to other countries during the fifteenth century. 

Even during the Indo-Afghan and Mughal periods in India 
there was occasional diplomatic intercourse between India and 
China. Mohammed bin Tughlak, Sultan of Delhi (1326-51) sent 
the famous Arab traveller, Ibn Batuta, as ambassador to the 
Chinese court. Bengal had at that time shaken off the suzerainty 
of Delhi and became an independent sultanate. In the middle 
of the fourteenth century the Chinese court sent two ambassadors, 
Hu-Shien and Fin-Shien, to the Bengal Sultan. This led to a 
succession of ambassadors being sent from Bengal to China during 
Sultan Ghias-ud Din's reign. This was the period of the Ming 
Emperors in China. One of the later embassies, sent in 1414 by 
Saif-ud Din, carried valuable presents, among them a live giraffe. 
How a giraffe managed to reach India is a mystery: probably it 
it came as a gift from Africa and was sent on to the Ming Emperor 

198 



as a rarity which would be appreciated. It was indeed greatiy 
appreciated in China where a giraffe is considered an auspicious 
symbol by the followers of Confucius. There is no doubt that the 
animal was a giraffe for, apart from a long account of it, there is 
also a Chinese picture of it on silk. The court artist, who made 
this picture, has written a long account in praise of it and of the 
good fortune that flows from it. 'The ministers and the people 
all gathered to gaze at it and their joy knows no end.' 

Trade between India and China, which had flourished during 
the Buddhist period, was continued throughout the Indo-Afghan 
and Mughal periods, and there was a continuous exchange of 
commodities. The trade went overland across the northern 
Himalayan passes and along the old caravan routes of central Asia. 
There was also a considerable sea-borne trade, via the islands 
of south-east Asia, chiefly to south Indian ports. 

During these thousand years and more of intercourse between 
India and China, each country learned something from the 
other, not only in the regions of thought and philosophy, but 
also in the arts and sciences of life. Probably China was more 
influenced by India than India by China, which is a pity, for 
India could well have received, with profit to herself, some of 
the sound commonsense of the Chinese, and with its aid checked 
her own extravagant fancies. China took much from India but 
she was always strong and self-confident enough to take it in her 
own way and fit it in somewhere in her own texture of life.* Even 
Buddhism and its intricate philosophy became tinged with the 
doctrines of Confucius and Lao-tze. The somewhat pessimistic 
oudook of Buddhist philosophy could not change or suppress the 
love of life and gaiety of the Chinese. There is an old Chinese 
proverb which says: 'If the government gets hold of you, they'll 
flog you to death; if the Buddhists get hold of you, they'll starve 
you to death!' 

A famous Chinese novel of the sixteenth century — 'Monkey' 
by Wu Ch'en-en (translated into English by Arthur Waley) — 
deals with the mythical and fantastic adventures of Hsuan-Tsang 
on his way to India. The book ends with a dedication to India: 
T dedicate this work to Buddha's pure land. May it repay the 
kindness of patron and preceptor, may it mitigate the sufferings 
of the lost and damned ' 

After being cut off from each other for many centuries, India 
and China were brought by some strange fate under the influence 
of the British East India Company. India had to endure this for 
long; in China the contact was brief, but even so it brought opium 
and war. 

And now the wheel of fate has turned full circle and again 

'Professor Hu Shih, the leader of the new Chinese renaissance movement, has written on 
the past 'Indianization of China. ' 

199 



India and China look towards each other and past memories 
crowd in their minds; again pilgrims of a new kind cross or fly 
over the mountains that separate them, bringing their messages 
of cheer and goodwill and creating fresh bonds of a friendship 
that will endure. 

Indian Colonies and Culture in South-East Asia 

To know and understand India one has to travel far in time 
and space, to forget for a while her present condition with all 
its misery and narrowness and horror, and to have glimpses of 
what she was and what she did. 'To know my country', wrote 
Rabindranath Tagore, 'one has to travel to that age, when she 
realized her soul and thus transcended her physical boundaries, 
when she revealed htr being in a radiant magnanimity which 
illumined the eastern horizon, making her recognized as their 
own by those in alien shores who were awakened into a surprise 
of life; and not now when she has withdrawn herself into a narrow 
barrier of obscurity, into a miserly pride of exclusiveness, into a 
poverty of mind that dumbly revolves around itself in an unmeaning 
repetition of a past that has lost its light and has no message for 
the pilgrims of the future.' 

One has not only to go back in time but to travel, in mind 
if not in body, to various countries of Asia, where India spread 
out in many ways, leaving immortal testimony of her spirit, her 
power, and her love of beauty. How few of us know of these 
great achievements of our past, how few realize that if India 
was great in thought and philosophy, she was equally great in 
action. The history that men and women from India made far 
from their homeland has still to be written. Most westerners still 
imagine that ancient history is largely concerned with the Medite- 
rranean countries, and medieval and modern history is dominated 
by the quarrelsome little continent of Europe. And still they make 
plans for the future as if Europe only counted and the rest could 
be fitted in anywhere. 

Sir Charles Eliot has written that 'Scant justice is done to 
India's position in the world by those European histories which 
recount the exploits of her invaders and leave the impression 
that her own people were a feeble dreamy folk, sundered from 
the rest of mankind by their seas and mountain frontiers. Such 
a picture takes no account of the intellectual conquests of the 
Hindus. Even their political conquests were not contemptible, 
and are remarkable for the distance, if not the extent, of the 
territories occupied. . . .But such military or commercial inva- 
sions are insignificant compared with the spread of Indian 
thought."* 

•Eliot: 'Hinduism and Buddhism', Vol /., p. xii. 
200 



Eliot was probably unaware, when he wrote, of many recent 
discoveries in south-east Asia, which have revolutionized the 
conception of India's and Asia's past. The knowledge of those 
discoveries would have strengthened his argument and shown 
that Indian activities abroad, even apart from the spread of 
her thought, were very far from being insignificant. I remember 
when I first read, about fifteen years ago, some kind of a detailed 
account of the history of South-East Asia, how amazed I was 
and how excited I became. New panoramas opened out before 
me, new perspectives of history, new conceptions of India's past, 
and I had to adjust all my thinking and previous notions to them. 
Champa, Cambodia and Angkor, Srivijaya and Majapahit suddenly 
rose out of the void, took living shape, vibrant with that instinctive 
feeling which makes the past touch the present. 

Of Sailendra, the mighty man of war and conquest and other 
achievements, Dr. H. G. Quaritch Wales has written: 'This great 
conqueror, whose achievements can only be compared with those 
of the greatest soldiers known to western history, and whose fame 
in his time sounded from Persia to China, in a decade or two 
built up a vast maritime empire which endured for five centuries, 
and made possible the marvellous flowering of Indian art and 
culture in Java and Cambodia. Yet in our encyclopaedias and 
histories... one will search in vain for a reference to this far-flung 

empire or to its noble founder The very fact of such an empire 

ever having existed is scarcely known, except by a handful of 
Oriental scholars.'* The military exploits of these early Indian 
colonists are important as throwing light on certain aspects of 
the Indian character and genius which have hitherto not been 
appreciated. But far more important is the rich civilization they 
built up in their colonies and settlements and which endured 
for over a thousand years. 

During the past quarter of a century a great deal of light has 
been thrown on the history of this widespread area in south-east 
Asia, which is sometimes referred to as Greater India. There are 
many gaps still, many contradictions, and scholars continue to 
put forward their rival theories, but the general outline is clear 
enough, and sometimes there is an abundance of detail. There 
is no lack of material, for there are references in Indian books, 
and accounts of Arab travellers and, mcst important of all, Chinese 
historical accounts. There are also many old inscriptions, coper- 
plates, etc., and in Java and Bali there is a rich literature based on 
Indian sources, and often paraphrasing Indian epics and myths. 
Greek and Latin sources have also supplied some information. But, 
above all, there are the magnificent ruins of ancient monuments, 
especially at Angkor and Borobudurf. 

*In 'Towards Angkor', Harrap, 19S7. 

\ Reference might be made to Dr. R. C. Majumdar's 'Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far 

201 



From the first century of the Christian era onwards wave after 
wave of Indian colonists spread east and south-east reaching 
Ceylon, Burma, Malaya, Java, Sumatra, Borneo, Siam, Cambodia, 
and Indo-China. Some of them managed to reach Formosa, the 
Philippine Islands and Celebes. Even as far as Madagascar the 
current language is Indonesian with a mixture of Sanskrit words. 
It must have taken them several hundred years to spread out in 
this way, and possibly all of these places were not reached directly 
from India but from some intermediate settlement. There appear 
to have been four principal waves of colonization from the first 
century A.C. to about 900 A.C., and in between there must have 
been a stream of people going eastwards. But the most remarkable 
feature of these ventures was that they were evidently organized 
by the state. Widely scattered colonies were started almost 
simultaneously and almost always the settlements were situated 
on strategic points and on important trade routes. The names that 
were given to these settlements were old Indian names. Thus 
Cambodia, as it is known now, was called Kamboja, which was 
a well-known town in ancient India, in Gandhara or the Kabul 
valley. This itself indicates roughly the period of this colonization, 
for at that time Gandhara (Afghanistan) must have been an 
important part of Aryan India. 

What led to these extraordinary expeditions across perilous 
seas and what was the tremendous urge behind them? They 
could not have been thought of or organized unless they had 
been preceded for many generations or centuries by individuals 
or small groups intent on trade. In the most ancient Sanskrit 
books there are vague references to these countries of the east. 
It is not always easy to identify the names given in them but 
sometimes there is no difficulty. Java is clearly from 'Yavadvipa' 
or the Island of Millet. Even to-day Java means barley or millet 
in India. The other names given in the old books are also usually 
associated with minerals, metals, or some industrial or agricultural 
product. This nomenclature itself makes one think of trade. 

Dr. R. C. Majumdar has pointed out that 'If literature can 
be regarded as a fair reflex of the popular mind, trade and com- 
merce must have been a supreme passion in India in the centuries 
immediately preceding and following the Christian era.' All this 
indicates an expanding economy and a constant search for distant 
markets. 

This trade gradually increased in the third and second centuries 
B.C. and then these adventurous traders and merchants may have 
been followed by missionaries, for this was just the period after 
Ashoka. The old stories in Sanskrit contain many accounts of 
perilous sea voyages and of shipwrecks. Both Greek and Arab 

East' (Calcutta, 1927), and his 'Svarnadvipa' (Calcutta, 1937). Also to the publications 
of the Greater India Society (Calcutta). 

202 



accounts show that there was regular maritime intercourse between 
India and the Far East at least as early as the first century A.C. 
The Malay Peninsula and the Indonesian Islands lay on the direct 
trade route between China and India, Persia, Arabia, and the 
Mediterranean. Apart from their geographical importance these 
countries contained valuable minerals, metals, spices, and timber. 
Malaya was then, as now, famous for its tin mines. Probably the 
earliest voyages were along the east coast of India-Kalinga (Orissa), 
Bengal, Burma and then down the Malay Peninsula. Later the 
direct sea routes from east and south India were developed. It 
was along this sea route that many Chinese pilgrims came to India. 
Fa Hsien in the fifth century passed Java and complains that 
there were many heretics then, meaning people following the 
Brahminical faith and not Buddhism. 

It is clear that shipbuilding was a well-developed and flourish- 
ing industry in ancient India. We have some details and particu- 
lars of the ships built in those days. Many Indian ports are 
mentioned. South Indian (Andhra) coins of the second and third 
centuries A.C. bear the device of a two-masted ship. The Ajanta 
Frescoes depict the conquest of Ceylon and ships carrying ele- 
phants are shown. 

The huge states and empires that developed from the original 
Indian settlements were essentially naval powers interested in 
trade and, therefore, in the control of the sea-routes. They came 
into conflict with each other on the seas, and at least once one of 
them challenged the Chola State of South India. But the Cholas 
were also strong on the seas and they sent a naval expedition which 
subdued for a while the Sailendra Empire. 

There is an interesting Tamil inscription of 1088 A.C. which 
refers to a 'Corporation of the Fifteen Hundred.' This was 
apparently a union of traders who were described in it as 'brave 
men, born to wander over many countries ever since the begin- 
ning of the Krita age, penetrating the regions of the six con- 
tinents by land and water routes, and dealing in various articles 
such as horses, elephants, precious stones, perfumes, and drugs, 
either wholesale or in retail.' 

This was the background of the early colonizing ventures of 
the Indian people. Trade and adventure and the urge for ex- 
pansion drew them to these eastern lands which were compre- 
hensively described in old Sanskrit books as the Svarnabhumi, 
the Land of Gold or as Svarnadvipa, the Island of Gold. The 
very name had a lure about it. The early colonists settled down, 
more followed and thus a peaceful penetration went on. There 
was a fusion of the Indians with the races they found there, and 
also the evolution of a mixed culture. It was only then, probably, 
that the political element came from India, some Kshatriya princes, 
cadets of the noble families, in search of adventure and dominion. 



203 



It is suggested, from a similarity of names, that many of these 
people who came were from the wide-spread Malva tribe in 
India — hence the Malay race which has played such an important 
part in the whole of Indonesia. A part of central India is still 
known as Malwa. The early colonists are supposed to have gone 
from Kalinga on the east coast (Orissa) but it was the Hindu 
Pallava Kingdom of the south that made an organized effort at 
colonization. The Sailendra dynasty, which became so famous 
in south-east Asia, is believed to have come from Orissa. At that 
time Orissa was a stronghold of Buddhism but the ruling dynasty 
was Brahminical. 

All these Indian colonies were situated between two great 
countries and two great civilizations — India and China. Some 
of them, on the Asiatic mainland, actually touched the frontiers 
of the Chinese Empire, the others were on the direct trade route 
between China and India. Thus they were influenced by both 
these countries and a mixed Indo-Chinese civilization grew up 
but such was the nature of these two cultures that there was no 
conflict between the two and mixed patterns of different shapes 
and varying contents emerged. The countries of the mainland — 
Burma, Siam, Indo-China — were more influenced by China, the 
islands and the Malay Peninsula had more of the impress of 
India. As a rule the methods of government and the general 
philosophy of life came from China, religion and art from India. 
The mainland countries depended for their trade largely on 
China and there were frequent exchanges of ambassadors. But 
even in Cambodia and in the mighty remains of Angkor the 
only artistic influence that has been so far detected came from 
India. But Indian art was flexible and adaptable and in each 
country it flowered afresh and in many new ways, always retain- 
ing that basic impress which it derived from India. Sir John 
Marshall has referred to 'the amazingly vital and flexible charac- 
ter of Indian art' and he points out how both Indian and Greek 
art had the common capacity to 'adapt themselves to suit the 
needs of every country, race, and religion with which they came 
into contact.' 

Indian art derives its basic character from certain ideals asso- 
ciated with the religious and philosophic outlook of India. As 
religion went from India to all these eastern lands, so also went 
this basic conception of art. Probably the early colonies were 
definitely Brahminical and Buddhism spread later. The two 
existed side by side as friends and mixed forms of popular worship 
grew up. This Buddhism was chiefly of the Mahayana type, 
easily adaptable, and both Brahminism and Buddhism, under 
the influence of local habits and traditions, had probably moved 
away from the purity of their original doctrines. In later years 
there were mighty conflicts between a Buddhist state and a 

204 



Brahminical state but these were essentially political and eco- 
nomic wars for control of trade and sea routes. 

The history of these Indian colonies covers a period of about 
thirteen hundred years or more, from the early beginnings in 
the first or second century A.C. to the end of the fifteenth century. 
The early centuries are vague and not much is known except that 
many small states existed. Gradually they consolidate themselves 
and by the fifth century great cities take shape. By the eighth 
century seafaring empires have arisen, partly centralized but also 
exercising a vague suzerainty over many lands. Sometimes these 
dependencies became independent and even presumed to attack 
the central power and this has led to some confusion in our under- 
standing of those periods. 

The greatest of these states was the Sailendra Empire, or the 
empire of Sri Vijaya, which became the dominant power both 
on sea and land in the whole of Malaysia by the eighth century. 
This was till recently supposed to have its origin and capital in 
Sumatra but later researches indicate that it began in the Malay 
Peninsula. At the height of its power it included Malaya, Ceylon, 
Sumatra, part of Java, Borneo, Celebes, the Philippines, and 
part of Formosa, and probably exercised suzerainty over Cam- 
bodia and Champa (Annam). It was a Buddhist Empire. 

But long before the Sailendra dynasty had established and 
consolidated this empire, powerful states had grown up in Malaya, 
Cambodia, and Java. In the northern part of the Malay Peninsula, 
near the borders of Siam, extensive ruins, says R. J. Wilkinson, 
'point to the past existence of powerful states and a high standard 
of wealth and luxury.' In Champa (Annam) there was the city 
of Pandurangam in the third century and in the fifth century 
Kamboja became a great city. A great ruler, Jayavarman, united 
the smaller states in the ninth century and built up the Cambodian 
Empire with its capital at Angkor. Cambodia was probably under 
the suzerainty of the Sailendras from time to time, but this must 
have been nominal, and it reasserted its independence in the 
ninth century. This Cambodian state lasted for nearly four 
hundred years under a succession of great rulers and great builders, 
Jayavarman, Yashovarman, Indravarman, Suryavarman. The 
capital became famous in Asia and was known as Angkor the 
Magnificent,' a city of a million inhabitants, larger and more 
splendid than the Rome of the Caesars. Near the city stood the 
vast temple of Angkor Vat. The empire of Cambodia flourished 
till the end of the thirteenth century, and the account of a Chinese 
envoy who visited it in 1297 describes the wealth and splendour 
of its capital. But suddenly it collapsed, so suddenly that some 
buildings were left unfinished. There were external attacks and 
internal troubles, but the major disaster seems to have been the 
silting up of the Mekong river, which converted the approaches 

205 



to the city into marshlands and led to its abandonment. 

Java also broke away from the Sailendra Empire in the ninth 
century, but even so the Sailendras continued as the leading 
power in Indonesia till the eleventh century, when they came 
into conflict with the Chola power of South India. The Cholas 
were victorious and held sway over large parts of Indonesia for 
over fifty years. On the withdrawal of the Cholas the Sailendras 
recovered and continued as an independent state for nearly three 
hundred years more. But it was no longer the dominant power in 
the eastern seas and in the thirteenth century began the disruption 
of its empire. Java grew at its expense as also did the Thais (Siam). 
In the second half of the fourteenth century Java completely 
conquered the Sailendra Empire of Srivijaya. 

This Javan state which now rose into prominence had a long 
history behind it. It was a Brahminical state which had conti- 
nued its attachment to the older faith in spite of the spread of 
Buddhism. It had resisted the political and economic sway of the 
Sailendra Empire of Srivijaya even when more than half of Java 
itself was occupied by the latter. It consisted of a community of 
sea faring folk intent on trade and passionately fond of building 
great structures in stone. Originally it was called the Kingdom 
of Singhasari, but in 1292 a new city, Majapahit, was founded 
and from this grew the empire of Majapahit which succeeded 
Srivijaya as the dominant power in south-east Asia. Majapahit 
insulted some Chinese envoys sent by Kublai Khan and was puni- 
shed for this by a Chinese expedition. Probably the Javanese 
learnt from the Chinese the use of gunpowder and this helped 
them finally to defeat the Sailendras. 

Majapahit was a highly centralized, expanding empire. Its 
system of taxation is said to have been very well organized and 
special attention was paid to trade and its colonies. There was 
a commerce department of government, a colonial department, 
and departments for public health, war, the interior, etc. There 
was also a supreme court of justice consisting of a number of 
judges. It is astonishing how well this imperialist state was 
organized. Its chief business was trade from India to China. 
One of its well-known rulers was the Queen Suhita. 

The war between Majapahit and Srivijaya was a very cruel 
one and though it ended in the complete victory of the former, 
it sowed the seeds of fresh conflict. From the ruins of the Sailendra 
power, allied to other elements, notably Arabs and Moslem 
converts, rose the Malaya power in Sumatra and Malacca. The 
command of the eastern seas, which had so long been held by 
South India or the Indian colonies, now passed to the Arabs. 
Malacca rose into prominence as a great centre of trade and seat 
of political power, and Islam spread over the Malay Peninsula 
and the islands. It was this new power that finally put and end to 

206 



Majapahit towards the end of the fifteenth century. But within a 
few years, in 1511, the Portuguese, under Albuquerque, came 
and took possession of Malacca. Europe had reached the Far 
East through her newly developing sea power. 

The Influence of Indian Art Abroad 

These records of ancient empires and dynasties have an interest 
for the antiquarian, but they have a large interest in the history 
of civilization and art. From the point of view of India they are 
particularly important, for it was India that functioned there and 
exhibited her vitality and genius in a variety of ways. We see her 
bubbling over with energy and spreading out far and wide, carry- 
ing not only her thought but her other ideals, her art, her trade, 
her language and literature, and her methods of government. 
She was not stagnant, or standing aloof, or isolated and cut off by 
mountain and sea. Her people crossed those high mountain 
barriers and perilous seas and built up, as M. R6n6 Grousset says, 
'a Greater India politically as little organized as Greater Greece, 
but morally equally harmonious.' As a matter of fact even the 
political organization of these Malayasian states was of a high 
order, though it was not part of the Indian political structure. 
But M. Grousset refers to the wider areas where Indian culture 
spread: 'In the high plateau of eastern Iran, in the oases of 
Serindia, in the arid wastes of Tibet, Mongolia, and Manchuria, 
in the ancient civilized lands of China and Japan, in the lands of 
the primitive Mons and Khmers and other tribes in Indo-China, 
in the countries of the Malayo-Polynesians, in Indonesia and 
Malay, India left the indelible impress of her- high culture, not 
only upon religion, but also upon art and literature, in a word, 
all the higher things of spirit.'* 

Indian civilization took root especially in the countries of 
south-east Asia and the evidence for this can be found all over 
the place to-day. There were great centres of Sanskrit learning 
in Champa, Angkor, Srivijaya, Majapahit, and other places. 
The names of the rulers of the various states and empires that 
arose are purely Indian and Sanskrit. This does not mean that 
they were pure Indian, but it does mean that they were Indianized. 
State ceremonies were Indian and conducted in Sanskrit. All 
the officers of the state bear old Sanskrit titles and some of these 
titles and designations have been continued up till now, not only 
in Thailand but in the Moslem states of Malaya. The old litera- 
tures of these places in Indonesia are full of Indian myth and 
legend. The famous dances of Java and Bali derive from India. 
The little island of Bali has indeed largely maintained its old 

» 'Civilizations of the East' by Rini Grousset, Volume II, p. 276. 

207 



Indian culture down to modern times and even Hinduism has 
persisted there. The art of writing went to the Philippines from 
India. 

In Cambodia the alphabet is derived from South India and 
numerous Sanskrit words have been taken over with minor varia- 
tions. The civil and criminal law is based on the Laws of Manu, 
the ancient law-giver of India, and this has been codified, with 
variations due to Buddhist influence, in modern Cambodian 
legislation.* 

But above all else it is in the magnificent art and architecture 
of these old Indian colonies that the Indian influence is most 
marked. The original impulse was modified, adapted, and fused 
with the genius of the place and out of this fusion arose the 
monuments and wondeiful temples of Angkor and Borobudur. 
At Borobudur in Java the whole life story of Buddha is carved 
in stone. At other places bas-reliefs reproduce the legends of 
Vishnu and Rama and Krishna. Of Angkor, Mr. Osbert Sitwell 
has written: 'Let it be said immediately that Angkor, as it stands, 
ranks as chief wonder of the world to-day, one of the summits to 
which human genius has aspired in stone, infinitely more impressive, 
lovely and, as well, romantic, than anything that can be seen in 
China... .The material remains of a civilization that flashed its 
wings, of the utmost brilliance, for six centuries, and then perished 
so utterly that even his name has died from the lips of man.' 

Round the great temple of Angkor Vat is a vast area of mighty 
ruins with artificial lakes and pools, and canals and bridges over 
them, and a great gate dominated by 'a vast sculptured head, a 
lovely, smiling but enigmatic Cambodian face, though one raised 
to the power and beauty of a god.' The face with its strangely 
fascinating and disturbing smile — the Angkor smile' — is repeated 
again and again. This gate leads to the temple: 'the neighbouring 
Bayon can be said to be the most imaginative and singular in the 
world, more lovely than Angkor Vat, because more unearthly in 

its conception, a temple from a city in some other distant planet 

imbued with the same elusive beauty that often lives between the 
lines of a great poem.'f 

The inspiration for Angkor came from India but it was the 
Khmer genius that developed it, or the two fused together and 
produced this wonder. The Cambodian king who is said to have 
built this great temple is named Jayavarman VII, a typical 
Indian name. 

Dr. Quaritch Wales says that 'when the guiding hand of India 
was removed, her inspiration was not forgotten, but the Khmer 

*A. Leclire, 'Recherches sur les origines brahmaniques des lois Cambodgiennes' quoted in 
B. R. Chatterji's 'Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia' (Calcutta, 1928). 

t These extracts have been taken from Osbert Sitwell's'Escape with Me — An Oriental 
Sketch Book' (1941). 

208 



genius was released to mould from it vast new conceptions of 
amazing vitality different from, and hence not properly to be 
compared with anything matured in a purely Indian environ- 
ment .... It is true that Khmer culture is essentially based on 
the inspiration of India, without which the Khmers at besi might 
have produced nothing greater than the barbaric splendour of 
the Central American Mayas; but it must be admitted that here, 
more than anywhere else in Greater India, this inspiration fell on 
fertile soil'* 

This leads one to think that in India itself that original inspira- 
tion gradually faded because the mind and the soil became over- 
worked and undernourished for lack of fresh currents and ideas. 
So long as India kept her mind open and gave of her riches to 
others, and received from them what she lacked, she remained 
fresh and strong and vital. But the more she withdrew into her shell, 
intent on preserving herself, uncontaminated by external influececs, 
the more she lost that inspiration and her life became increasingly 
a dull round of meaningless activities all centred in the dead past. 
Losing the art of creating beauty, her children lost even the capacity 
to recognize it. 

It is to European scholars and archaeologists that the excava- 
tions and discoveries in Java, Angkor and elsewhere in Greater 
India are due, more especially to French and Dutch scholars. 
Great cities and monuments probably still lie buried there awaiting 
discovery. Meanwhile it is said that important sites in Malaya 
containing ancient ruins have been destroyed by mining opera- 
tions or for obtaining material for building roads. The war will 
no doubt add to this destruction. 

Some years ago I had a letter from a Taai (Siamese) student 
who had come to Tagore's Santiniketan and was returning to 
Thailand. He wrote: 'I always consider myself exceptionally 
fortunate in being able to come to this great and ancient land 
of Aryavarta and to pay my humble homage at the feet of 
grandmother India in whose affectionate arms my mother country 
was so lovingly brought up and taught to appreciate and love what 
was sublime and beautiful in culture and religion.' This may not 
be typical, but it does convey some idea of the general feeling 
towards India which, though vague and overladen with much 
else, still continues in many of the countries of South-East Asia. 
Everywhere an intense and narrow nationalism has grown, looking 
to itself and distrustful of others; there is fear and hatred of 
European domination and yet a desire to emulate Europe and 
America; there is often some contempt for India because of her 
dependent condition; and yet behind all this there is a feeling of 
respect and friendship for India, for old memories endure and 
people have not forgotten that there was a time when India was 

*From 'Towards Angkor' by Dr. H. G. Quaritch Wales (Harrap, 1933). 

209 



a mother country to these and nourished them with rich fare from 
her own treasure-house. Just as Hellenism spread from Greece to 
the countries of the Mediterranean and in Western Asia, India's 
cultural influence spread to many countries and left its power- 
ful impress upon them. 

'From Persia to the Chinese Sea,' writes Sylvain L6vi, 'from 
the icy regions of Siberia to the islands of Java and Borneo, from 
Oceania to Socotra, India has propagated her beliefs, her tales 
and her civilization. She has left indelible imprints on one-fourth 
of the human race in the course of a long succession of centuries. 
She has the right to reclaim in universal history the rank that 
ignorance has refused her for a long time and to hold her place 
amongst the great nations summarising and symbolising the 
spirit of Humanity.'* 

Old Indian Art 

The amazing expansion of Indian culture and art to other coun- 
tries has led to some of the finest expressions of this art being 
found outside India. Unfortunately many of our old monuments 
and sculptures, especially in northern India, have been destroyed 
in the course of ages. 'To know Indian art in India alone,' says 
Sir John Marshall, 'is to know but half its story. To apprehend 
it to the full, we must follow it in the wake of Buddhism, to central 
Asia, China, and Japan; we must watch it assuming new forms 
and breaking into new beauties as it spreads over Tibet and Burma 
and Siam; we must gaze in awe at the unexampled grandeur of 
its creations in Cambodia and Java. In each of these countries, 
Indian art encounters a different racial genius, a different local 
environment, and under their modifying influence it takes on a 
different garb.'t 

Indian art is so intimatly associated with Indian religion and 
philosophy that it is difficult to appreciate it fully unless one 
has some knowledge of the ideals that governed the Indian mind. 
In art, as in music, there is a gulf which separates eastern from 
western conceptions. Probably the great artists and builders of 
the middle ages in Europe would have felt more in tune with 
Indian art and sculpture than modern European artists who 
derive part of their inspiration at least from the Renaissance period 
and after. For in Indian art there is always a religious urge, a 
looking beyond, such as probably inspired the builders of the 
great cathedrals of Europe. Beauty is conceived as subjective, 
not objective; it is a thing of the spirit, though it may also take 
lovely shape in form or matter. The Greeks loved beauty for its 

* Quoted in V. N. Ghosal's 'Progress of Greater Indian Research, 1917-1942' (Calcutta, 
1943). 

(From Foreword to Reginald Le May's 'Buddhist Art In Slam' {Cambridge, 1938), 

quoted by Ghosal In 'Progress of Greater Indian Research' {Calcutta, 1943). 

210 



own sake and found not onlyjoy but truth in it; the ancient Indians 
loved beauty also but always they sought to put some deeper 
significance in their work, some vision of the inner truth as they 
saw it. In the supreme examples of their creative work they extort 
admiration, even though one may not understand what they were 
aiming at or the ideas that governed them. In lesser example::, 
this lack of understanding, of not being in tune with the artist's 
mind, becomes a bar to appreciation. There is a vague feeling 
of discomfort, even of irritation, at something one cannot grasp, 
and this leads to the conclusion that the artist did not know 
his job and has failed. Sometimes there is even a feeling of 
repulsion. 

I know nothing about art, eastern or western, and am not 
competent to say anything about it. I react to it as any untutored 
layman might do. Some painting or sculpture or building fills 
me with delight, or moves me and makes me feel a strange emotion; 
or it just pleases me a little; or it does not affect me at all and I 
pass it by almost unnoticed; or it repeis me. I cannot explain 
these reactions or speak learnedly about the merits or demerits of 
works of art. The Buddha statue at Anuradhapura in Ceylon 
moved me greatly and a picture of it has been my companion for 
many years. On the other hand some famous temples in South 
India, heavy with carving and detail, disturb me and fill me with 
unease. 

Europeans, trained in the Greek tradition, at first examined 
Indian art from the Grecian point of view. They recognized 
something they knew in the Graeco -Buddhist art of Gandhara 
and the Frontier and considered other forms in India as degraded 
types of this. Gradually a new approach was made and it was 
pointed out that Indian art was something original and vital and 
in no way derived from this Graeco-Buddhist art, which was a pale 
reflection of it. This new aproach came more from the Continent 
of Europe than from England. It is curious that Indian art, and 
this applies to Sanskrit literature also, has been more appreciated 
on the Continent than in England. I have often wondered how 
far this has been conditioned by the unfortunate political relation- 
ship existing between India and England. Probably there is 
something in that, though there must be other and more basic 
causes of difference also. There are of course many Englishmen, 
artists and scholars and others, who have come near to the spirit 
and outlook of India and helped to discover our old treasures and 
interpret them to the world. There are many also to whom 
India is grateful for their warm friendship and service. Yet the 
fact remains that there is a gulf, and an ever-widening gulf, between 
Indians and Englishmen. On the Indian side this is easier to 
understand, at any rate for me, for a great deal has happened in 
recent years that has cut deep into our souls. On the other side 

211 



perhaps some similar reactions have taken place for different 
reasons; among them, anger at being put in the wrong before the 
world when, according to them, the fault was not theirs. But 
the feeling is deeper than politics and it comes out unawares, and 
most of all it seems to affect English intellectuals. The Indian, to 
them, appears to be a special manifestation of original sin and all 
his works bear this mark. A popular English author, though hardly 
representative of English thought or intelligence, has recently 
written a book which is full of a malicious hatred and disgust for 
almost everything Indian. A more eminent and representative 
English author, Mr. Osbert Sitwell says in his book 'Escape With 
Me' (1941) that 'the idea of India, despite its manifold and diverse 
marvels, continued to be repellent.' He refers also to 'that 
repulsive, greasy quality that so often mars Hindu works of art.' 

Mr. Sitwell is perfectly justified in holding those opinions 
about Indian art or India generally. I am sure he feels that way. 
I am myself repelled by much in India but I do not feel that way 
about India as a whole. Naturally, for I am an Indian and I 
cannot easily hate myself, however unworthy I may be. But it is 
not a question of opinions or views on art; it is much more a 
conscious and subconscious dislike and unfriendliness to a whole 
people. Is it true that those whom we have injured, we dislike 
and hate? 

Among the Englishmen who have appreciated Indian art and 
applied new standards of judgment to it have been Lawrence 
Binyon and E. B. Havell. Havell is particularly enthusiastic 
about the ideals of Indian art and the spirit underlying them. 
He emphasizes that a great national art affords an intimate 
revelation of national thought and character, but it is only to 
be appreciated if the ideals behind it are understood. An alien 
governing race misapprehending and depreciating those ideals 
sows the seeds of intellectual antipathy. Indian art, he says, was 
not addressed to a narrow coterie of literati. Its intention was 
to make the central ideas of religion and philosophy intelligible 
to the masses. 'That Hindu art was successful in its educa- 
tional purpose may be inferred from the fact, known to all who 
have intimate acquaintance with Indian life, that the Indian 
peasantry, though illiterate in the western sense, are among 
the most cultured of their class anywhere in the world.'* 

In art, as in Sanskrit poetry and Indian music, the artist was 
supposed to identify himself with nature in all her moods, to 
express the essential harmony .of man with nature and the uni- 
verse. That has been the keynote of all Asiatic art and it is because 
of this that there is a certain unity about the art of Asia, in spite 
of its great variety and the national differences that are so evi- 
dent. There is not much of old painting in India, except for the 

*£. B. Havell: 'The Ideals of Indian Art' {1920), p. xix. 

212 



lovely frescoes ofAjanta. Perhaps much of it has perished. It was 
in her sculpture and architecture that India stood out, just as 
China and Japan excelled in painting. 

Indian music, which is so different from European music, was 
highly developed in its own way and India stood out in this 
respect and influenced Asiatic music considerably, except for 
China and the Far East. Music thus became another link with 
Persia, Afghanistan, Arabia, Turkestan and, to some extent, in 
other areas where Arab civilization flourished, for instance, North 
Africa. Indian classical music will probably be appreciated in 
all these countries. 

An important influence in the development of art in India, 
as elsewhere in Asia, was the religious prejudice against graven 
images. The Vedas were against image worship and it was only 
at a comparatively late period in Buddhism that Buddha's person 
was represented in sculpture and painting. In the Mathura 
museum there is a huge stone figure of the Bodhisattva which is 
full of strength and power. This belongs to the Kushan period 
about the beginning of the Christian era. 

The early period of Indian art is full of a naturalism which 
may partly be due to Chinese influences. Chinese influence is 
visible at various stages of Indian art history, chiefly in the deve- 
lopment of this naturalism, just as Indian idealism went to China 
and Japan and powerfully influenced them during some of their 
great periods. 

During the Gupta period, fourth to sixth centuries A.C., the 
Golden Age of India as it is called, the caves ofAjanta were dug 
out and the frescoes painted. Bagh and Badami are also of this 
period. The Ajanta frescoes, very beautiful though they are, have, 
ever since their discovery, exercised a powerful influence on our 
present-day artists, who have turned away from life and sought 
to model their style on that ofAjanta, with unhappy results. 

Ajanta takes one back into some distant dream-like and yet 
very real world. These frescoes were painted by the Buddhist 
monks. Keep away from women, do not even look at them, for 
they are dangerous, has said their Master long ago. And yet 
we have here women in plenty, beautiful women, princesses, 
singers, dancers, seated and standing, beautifying themselves, or 
in procession. The women of Ajanta had become famous. How 
well those painter-monks must have known the world and the 
moving drama of life, how lovingly they have painted it, just as 
they have painted the Boddhisattva in his calm and other- 
worldly majesty. 

In the seventh and eighth centuries the mighty caves of Ellora 
were carved out of solid rock with the stupendous Kailasa 
temple in the centre; it is difficult to imagine how human beings 

213 



conceived this or, having conceived it, gave body and shape to 
their conception. The caves of Elephanta, with the powerful 
and subtle Trimurti, date also from this period. Also the group 
of monuments at M&mallapuram in South India. 

In the Elephanta caves there is a broken statue of Shiva 
Nataraja, Shiva dancing. Even in its mutilated condition, Havell 
says that it is a majestic conception and an embodiment of 
titanic power. 'Though the rock itself seems to vibrate with the 
rhythmic movement of the dance, the noble head bears the same 
look of serene calm and dispassion which illuminate the face of 
the Buddha.' 

There is another Shiva Nataraja in the British Museum and 
of this Epstein has written: 'Shiva dances, creating the world 
and destroying it, his large rhythms conjure up vast aeons of 
time, and his movements have a relentless magical power of 
incantation. A small group of the British Museum is the most 
tragic summing up of the death in love motive ever seen, and 
it epitomises, as no other work, the fatal element in human 
passion. Our European allegories are banal and pointless by 
comparison with these profound works, devoid of the trappings 
of symbolism, concentrating on the essential, the essentially 
plastic.'* 

There is a head of a Bodhisattva from Borobudur in Java which 
has been taken to the Glyptotek in Copenhagen. It is beautiful, 
in the sense of formal beauty, but, as Havell says, there is some- 
thing deeper in it revealing, as in a mirror, the pure soul of the 
Bodhisattva. 'It is a face which incarnates the stillness of the 
depths of the ocean; the serenity of an azure, cloudless sky; a 
beatitude beyond moral ken.' 

'Indian art in Java,' adds Havell, 'has a character of its own 
which distinguishes it from that of the continent from whence 
it came. There runs through both the same strain of deep serenity, 
but in the divine ideal of Java we lose the austere feeling which 
characterises the Hindu sculpture of Elephanta and Mamallapu- 
ram. There is more of human contentment and joy in Indo- 
Javanese art, an expression of that peaceful security which the 
Indian colonists enjoyed in their happy island home, after the 
centuries of storm and struggle which their forefathers had 
experienced on the mainland.'! 

India's Foreign Trade 

Throughout the first millennium of the Christian era, India's 
trade was widespread and Indian merchants controlled many 

* Epstein: 'Let There be Sculpture' (1942), p. 193. 
fHavell: 'The Ideals of Indian Art' (1920), p. 169. 

214 



foreign markets. It was dominant in the eastern seas and it reached 
out also to the Mediterranean. Pepper and other spices went 
from India or via India to the west, often on Indian and Chinese 
bottoms, and it is said that Alaric the Goth took away 3,000 
pounds of pepper from Rome. Roman writers bemoaned the 
fact that gold flowed from Rome to India and the east in exchange 
for various luxury articles. 

This trade was largely, in India as elsewhere at the time, one 
of give and take of materials found and developed locally. India 
was a fertile land and rich in some of the materials that other 
countries lacked, and the seas being open to her she sent these 
materials abroad. She also obtained them from the eastern islands 
and profited as a merchant carrier. But she had further advantages. 
She had been manufacturing cloth from the earliest ages, long 
before other countries did so, and a textile industry had deve- 
loped. Indian textiles went to far countries. Silk was also made 
from very early times though probably it was not nearly as good as 
Chinese silk, which began to be imported as early as the fourth 
century B.C. The Indian silk industry may have developed subse- 
quently, though it does not seem to have gone far. An important 
advance was made in the dyeing of cloth and special methods 
were discovered for the preparation of fast dyes. Among these was 
indigo, a word derived from India through Greece. It was probably 
this knowledge of dyeing that gave a great impetus to India's 
trade with foreign countries. 

Chemistry in India in the early centuries A.C. was probably 
more advanced than in other countries. I do not know much 
about it but there is a 'History of Hindu Chemistry' written by 
the doyen of Indian chemists and scientists, Sir P. C. Ray, who 
trained several generations of Indian scientists. Chemistry then 
was closely allied to alchemy and metallurgy. A famous Indian 
chemist and metallurgist was named NagSrjuna, and the simi- 
larity of the names has led some people to suggest that he was 
the same person as the great philosopher of the first century A.C. 
But this is very doubtful. 

The tempering of steel was known early in India, and Indian 
steel and iron were valued abroad, especially for warlike pur- 
poses. Many other metals were known and use.d and prepara- 
tions of metallic compounds were made for medicinal purposes. 
Distillation and calcination were well-known. The science of 
medicine was fairly well developed. Though based mainly on 
the old text books, considerable experimental progress was made 
right up to the medieval period. Anatomy and physiology were 
studied and the circulation of the blood was suggested long before 
Harvey. 

Astronomy, oldest of sciences, was a regular subject of the 
university curriculum and with it was mixed up astrology. A 

215 



very accurate calendar was worked out and this calendar is still 
in popular use. It is a solar calendar having lunar months, which 
leads to periodical adjustments. As elsewhere, the priests, or Brah- 
mins, were especially concerned with this calendar and they 
fixed the seasonal festivals as well as indicated the exact time of 
the eclipses of the sun and moon, which were also in the nature 
of festivals. They took advantage of this knowledge to encourage 
among the masses beliefs and observances, which they must have 
known to be superstitious, and thus added to their own prestige. 
A knowledge of astronomy, in its practical aspects, was of great 
help to the people who went on the seas. The ancient Indians were 
rather proud of the advances they had made in astronomical 
knowledge. They had contacts with Arab astronomy, which was 
largely based on Alexandria. 

It is difficult to say how far mechanical appliances had deve- 
loped then, but shipbuilding was a flourishing industry and 
there is frequent reference to various kinds of 'machines,' 
especially for purposes of war. This has led some enthusiastic 
and rather credulous Indians to imagine all kinds of compli- 
cated machines. It does seem, however, that India at that time 
was not behind any country in the making and use of tools and 
in the knowledge of chemistry and metallurgy. It was this that 
gave her an advantage in trade and enabled her for several cen- 
turies to control a number of foreign markets. 

Possibly she had one other advantage also — the absence of 
slave-labour, which handicapped Greek and other early civili- 
zations and came in the way of their progress. The caste system, 
with all its evils, which progressively increased, was infinitely 
better than slavery even for those lowest in the scale. Within each 
caste there was equality and a measure of freedom; each caste 
was occupational and applied itself to its own particular work. 
This led to a high degree of specialization and skill in handicrafts 
and craftsmanship. 

Mathematics in Ancient India 

Highly intellectual and given to abstract thinking as they were, 
one would expect the ancient Indians to excel in mathematics. 
Europe got its early arithmetic and algebra from the Arabs — 
hence the 'Arabic numerals' — but the Arabs themselves had 
previously taken them from India. The astonishing progress 
that the Indians had made in mathematics is now well known 
and it is recognized that the foundations of modern arithmetic 
and algebra were laid long ago in India. The clumsy method 
of using a counting frame and the use of Roman and such like 
numerals had long retarded progress when the ten Indian nume- 
rals, including the zero sign, liberated the human mind from 

216 



these restrictions and threw a flood of light on the behaviour of 
numbers. These number symbols were unique and entirely diffrent 
from all other symbols that had been in use in other countries. 
They are common enough to-day and we take them for granted, 
yet they contained the germs of revolutionary progress in them. 
It took many centuries for them to travel from India, via Baghdad, 
to the western world. 

A hundred and fifty years ago, during Napoleon's time, La 
Place wrote: 'It is India that gave us the ingenious method of 
expressing all numbers by means of ten symbols, each symbol 
receiving a value of position, as well as an absolute value; a pro- 
found and important idea which appears so simple to us now that 
we ignore its true merit, but its very simplicity, the great ease 
which it has lent to all computations, puts our arithmetic in the 
first rank of useful inventions; and we shall appreciate the gran- 
deur of this achievement when we remember that it escaped the 
genius of Archimedes and Apollonius, two of the greatest men 
produced by antiquity.'* 

The origins of geometry, arithmetic, and algebra in India go 
back to remote periods. Probably to begin with there was some 
kind of geometrical algebra used for making figures for Vedic 
altars. Mention is made in the most ancient books of the geome- 
trical method for the transformation of a square into a rect- 
angle having a given side: ax = c. Geometrical figures are even 
now commonly used in Hindu ceremonies. Geometry made prog- 
ress in India but in this respect Greece and Alexandria went 
ahead. It was in arithmetic and algebra that India kept the lead. 
The inventor or inventors of the decimal place-value system and 
the zero mark are not known. The earliest use of the zero symbol, 
so far discovered, is in one of the scriptural books dated about 
200 B.C. It is considered probable that the place-value system 
was invented about the beginning of the Christian era. The zero, 
called shunya or nothing, was orignally a dot and later it became 
a small circle. It was considered a number like any other. Pro- 
fessor Halsted thus emphasizes the vital significance of this 
invention: 'The importance of the creation of the zero mark 
can never be exaggerated. This giving to airy nothing, not merely 
a local habitation and a name, a picture, a symbol but helpful 
power, is the characteristic of the Hindu race from whence it 
sprang. It is like coining the Nirvana into dynamos. No single 
mathematical creation has been more potent for the general on-go 
of intelligence and power.'! 

Yet another modern mathematician has grown eloquent over 
this historic event. Dantzig in his 'Number' writes: 'This long 

^Quoted in Hogben's 'Mathematics for the Million', (London, 1942). 
tG. B. Halsted: 'On the Foundation and Technique of Arithmetic', p. 20 (Chicago, 
1912), quoted in 'History of Hindu Mathematics' by B. Datta and A. TV. Singh (1935). 

217 



period of nearly five thousand years saw the rise and fall of many 
a civilization, each leaving behind it a heritage of literature, art, 
philosophy, and religion. But what was the net achievement in 
the field of reckoning, the earliest art practised by man? An 
inflexible numeration so crude as to make progress well nigh 
impossible, and a calculating device so limited in scope that even 

elementary calculations called for the services of an expert 

Man used these devices for thousands of years without making 
a single worthwhile improvement in the instrument, without 

contributing a single important idea to the system Even when 

compared with the slow growth of ideas during the dark ages, 
the history of reckoning presents a peculiar picture of desolate 
stagnation. When viewed in this light the achievements of the 
unknown Hindu, who sometime in the first centuries of our era 
discovered the principle of position, assumes the importance of 
a world event.'* 

Dantzig is puzzled at the fact that the great mathematicians 
ofGreece did not stumble on this discoyery. 'Is it that the Greeks 
had such a marked contempt for applied science, leaving even 
the instruction of their children to slaves? But if so, how is it 
that the nation that gave us geometry and carried this science 
so far did not create even a rudimentary algebra? Is it not 
equally strange that algebra, that corner-stone of modern mathe- 
matics, also originated in India, and at about the same time that 
positional numeration did?' 

The answer to this question is suggested by Professor Hog- 
ben: 'The difficulty of understanding why it should have been 
the Hindus who took this step, why it was not taken by the 
mathematicians of antiquity, why it should first have been taken 
by practical man, is only insuperable if we seek for the explana- 
tion of intellectual progress in the genius of a few gifted indivi- 
duals, instead of in the whole social framework of custom thought 
which circumscribes the greatest individual genius. What hap- 
pened in India about AJ). 100 had happened before. May be it 

is happening now in Soviet Russia To accept it (this truth) 

is to recognise that every culture contains within itself its own 
doom, unless it pays as much attention to the education of the 
mass of mankind as to the education of the exceptionally gifted 
people.'! 

We must assume then that these momentous inventions were 
not just due to the momentary illumination of an erratic genius, 
much in advance of his time, but that they were essentialy the 
product of the social milieu and that they answered some insis- 
tent demand of the times. Genius of a high order was certainly 

^Quoted in L. Hogben's 'Mathematics for the Million', {London, 1942). 
tHogben: 'Mathematics for the Million', (London, 1942), p. 285. 

218 



necessary to find this out and fulfil the demand, but if the demand 
had not been there the urge to find some way out would have 
been absent, and even if the invention had been made it would 
have been foi gotten or put aside till circumstances more propi- 
tious for its use arose. It seems clear from the early Sanskrit works 
on mathematics that the demand was there, for these books are 
full of problems of trade and social relationship involving compli- 
cated calculations. There are problems dealing with taxation, 
debt, and interest; problems of partnership, barter and exchange, 
and the calculation of the fineness of gold. Society had grown 
complex and laige numbers of people were engaged in govern- 
mental operations and in an extensive trade. It was impossible 
to carry on without simple methods of calculation. 

The adoption of zero and the decimal place-value system in 
India unbarred the gates of the mind to rapid progress in arith- 
metic and algebra. Fractions come in, and the multiplication 
and division of fractions; the rule of three is discovered and per- 
fected; squares and square-roots (together with the sign of the 
square-root, V ) J cubes and cube-roots; the minus sign; tables 
of sines; n is evaluated as 3-1416; letters of the alphabet are used 
in algebra to denote unknowns; simple and quadratic equations 
are considered; the mathematics of zero are investigated. Zero 
is defined as a — a=0;a + 0=a; a-0=a; axO = 0; 
a becomes infinity. The conception of negative quantities 
also comes in, thus: 4 = ± 2. 

These and other advances in mathematics are contained in 
books written by a succession of eminent mathematicians from 
the fifth to the twelfth century A.C. There are earlier books also 
(Baudhayana, c. eighth century B.C.; Apastamba and Katyayana, 
both c. fifth century B.C.) which deal with geometrical problems, 
especially with triangles, rectangles, and squares. But the earliest 
extant book on algebra is by the famous astronomer, Aryabhata, 
who was born in A.C. 476. He wrote this book on astronomy and 
mathematics when he was only twenty-three years old. Arya- 
bhata, who is sometimes called the inventor of algebra, must have 
relied, partly at least, on the work of his predecessors. The next 
great name in Indian mathematics is that of Bhaskara I (A.C. 522), 
and he was followd by Brahmagupta (A.C. 628), who was also 
a famous astronomer, and who stated the laws applying to shunya 
or zero and made other notable advances. There follow a succes- 
sion of mathematicians who have written on arithmetic or algebra. 
The last great name is that of Bhaskara II, who was born in A.C. 
1114. He wrote three books, on astronomy, algebra, and arithmetic. 
His book on arithmetic is known as 'Lilavati', which is an odd 
name for a treatise on mathematics, as it is the name of a woman. 
There are frequent references in the book to a young girl who is 
addressed as 'O Lilavati' and is then instructed on the problems 

219 



stated. It is believed, without any definite proof, that Lilavati 
was Bhaskara's daughter. The style of the book is clear and simple 
and suitable for young persons to understand. The book is still 
used, partly for its style, in Sanskrit schools. 

Books on mathematics continued to appear (Narayana 1150, 
Ganesha 1545), but these are mere repetitions of what had been 
done. Very little original work on mathematics was done in 
India after the twelfth century till we reach the modern age. 

In the eighth century, during the reign of the Khalif Al- 
Mansur (753-774), a number of Indian scholars went to Baghdad, 
and among the books they took with them were works on mathe- 
matics and astronomy. Probably even earlier than this, Indian 
numerals had reached Baghdad, but this was the first systematic 
approach, and Aryabhata's and other books were translated into 
Arabic. They influenced the development of mathematics and 
astronomy in the Arab world, and Indian numerals were intro- 
duced. Baghdad was then a great centre of learning and Greek 
and Jewish scholars had gathered there bringing with them 
Greek philosophy, geometry, and science. The cultural influence 
of Baghdad was felt throughout the Moslem world from central 
Asia to Spain, and a knowledge of Indian mathematics in their 
Arabic translations spread all over this vast area. The numerals 
were called by the Arabs 'figures of Hind' (or India), and the 
Arabic word for a number is 'Hindsah', meaning 'from Hind'. 

From this Arab world the new mathematics travelled to Euro- 
pean countries, probably through the Moorish universities of 
Spain, and became the foundation for European mathematics. 
There was opposition in Europe to the use of the new numbers, 
as they were considered infidel symbols, and it took several hund- 
red years before they were in common use. The earliest known use 
is in a Sicilian coin of 1134; in Britain the first use is in 1490. 

It seems clear that some knowledge of Indian mathematics, 
and especially of the place-value system of numbers, had pene- 
trated into western Asia even before the formal embassy carried 
books to Baghdad. There is an interesting passage in a com- 
plaint made by a Syrin scholar-monk who was hurt at the arrog- 
ance of some Greek scholars who looked down on Syrians. Severus 
Sebokht was his name, and he lived in a convent situated on the 
Eupharates. He writes in A.C. 662 and tries to show that the 
Syrians were in no way inferior to the Greeks. By way of illustra- 
tion he refers to the Indians: 'I will omit all discussion of the 
science of the Hindus, a people not the same as the Syrians; their 
subtle discoveries in the science of astonomy, discoveries that 
are more ingenious than those of the Greeks and the Babylonians; 
their computing that surpasses description. I wish only to say that 
this computation is done by means of nine signs. If those who 
believe, because they speak Greek, that they have reached the 

220 



limits of science, should know of these things, they would be 
convinced that there are also others who know something.'* 

Mathematics in India inevitably makes one think of one extra- 
ordinary figure of recent times. This was Srinivasa Ramanujam. 
Born in a poor Brahmin family in south India, having no opportu- 
nities for a proper education, he became a clerk in the Madras 
Port Trust. But he was bubbling over with some irrepressible 
quality of instinctive genius and played about with numbers 
and equations in his spare time.- By a lucky chance he attracted 
the attention of a mathematician who sent some of his amateur 
work to Cambridge in England. People there were impressed 
and a scholarship was arranged for him. So he left his clerk's job 
and went to Cambridge and during a very brief period there did 
work of profound value and amazing originality. The Royal 
Society of England went rather out of their way and made him 
a Fellow, but he died two years later, probably of tuberculosis, 
at the age of thirty-three. Professor Julian Huxley has, I believe, 
referred to him somewhere as the greatest mathematician of the 
century. 

Rarr.anujam's brief life and death are symbolic of conditions 
in India. Of our millions how few get any education at all, how 
many live on the verge of starvation; of even those who get some 
education how many have nothing to look forward to but a 
clerkship in some office on a pay that is usually far less than the 
unemployment dole in England. If life opened its gates to them 
and offered them food and healthy conditions of living and edu- 
cation and opportunities of growth, how many among these 
millions would be eminent scientists, educationists, technicians, 
industrialists, writers and artists, helping to build a new India 
and a new world? 

Growth and Decay 

During the first thousand years of the Christian era, there are 
many ups and downs in India, many conflicts with invading 
elements and internal troubles. Yet it is a period of a vigorous 
national life, bubbling over with energy and spreading out in 
all directions. Culture develops into a rich civilization flowering 
out in philosophy, literature, drama, art, science, and mathematics. 
India's economy expands, the Indian horizon widens and other 
countries come within its scope. Contacts grow with Iran, China, 
the Hellenic world, central Asia, and above all, there is a powerful 
urge towards the eastern seas which leads to the establishment of 
Indian colonies and the spread of Indian culture far beyond India's 
boundaries. During the middle period of this millennium, from 

* Quoted in 'History of Hindu Mathematics' by B. Datta and A. JV. Singh (1933). / 
am indebted to this book for much information on this subject. 

221 



early in the fourth to the sixth century, the Gupta Empire flourishes 
and becomes the patron and symbol of this widespread intellectual 
and artistic activity. It is called the Golden or Classical Age of 
India and the writings of that period, which are classics in Sans- 
krit literature, reveal a serenity, a quiet confidence of the people 
in themselves, and a glow of pride at being privileged to be alive 
in that high noon of civilization, and with it the urge to use their 
great intellectual and artistic powers to the utmost. 

Yet even before that Golden Age had come to a close, signs 
of weakness and decay become visible. The White Huns come 
from the north-west in successive hordes and are repeatedly 
pushed back. But they come again and again and eat their way 
slowly into North India. For a half-century they even establish 
themselves as a ruling power all over the north. But then, with 
a great effort, the last of the great Guptas, joining up in a confe- 
deracy with Yashovarman, a ruler of Central India, drives out 
the Huns. 

This long-drawn-out conflict weakened India politically and 
militarily, and probably the settlement of large numbers of these 
Huns all over northern India gradually produced an inner change 
in the people. They were absorbed as all foreign elements had so 
far been absorbed, but they left their impress and weakened the 
old ideals of the Indo-Aryan races. Old accounts of the Huns are 
full of their excessive cruelty and barbarous behaviour which were 
so foreign to Indian standards of warfare and government. 

In the seventh century there was a revival and renascence 
under Harsha, both political and cultural. Ujjayini (modern 
Ujjain), which had been the brilliant capital of the Guptas, again 
became a centre of art and culture and the seat of a powerful king- 
dom. But in the centuries that followed, this too weakens and 
fades off. In the ninth century Mihira Bhoja, of Gujrat, conso- 
lidates a unified state in North and Central India with his capital 
at Kanauj. There is another literary revival of which the central 
figure is Rajashekhara. Again, at the beginning of the eleventh 
century, another Bhoja stands out as a powerful and attractive 
figure, and Ujjayini again becomes a great capital. This Bhoja 
was a remarkable man who distinguished himself in many fields. 
He was a grammarian and a lexicographer, and interested in 
medicine and astronomy. He was a builder and a patron of art 
and literature, and was himself a poet and a writer to whom 
many works are attributed. His name has become a part of popular 
fable and legend as a symbol of greatness, learning, and generosity. 

And yet for all these bright patches, an inner weakness seems 
to seize India, which affects not only her political status but her 
creative activities. There is no date for this, for the process was 
a slow and creeping one, and it affected north India earlier than 
the south. The south indeed becomes more important both poli- 

222 



tically and culturally. Perhaps this was due to the south having 
escaped the continuous strain of fighting waves of invaders; 
perhaps many of the writers and artists and master-builders migrat- 
ed to the south to escape from the unsettled conditions in the north. 
The powerful kingdoms of the south, with their brilliant courts, 
must have attracted these people and given them opportunities 
for creative work which they lacked elsewhere. 

But though the north did not dominate India, as it had often 
done in the past, and was split up into small states, life was still 
rich there and there were many centres of cultural and philo- 
sophic activity. Benares, as ever, was the heart of religious and philo- 
sophical thought, and every person who advanced a new theory 
or a new interpretation of an old theory, had to come there to 
justify himself. Kashmir was for long a great Sanskrit centre of 
Buddhist and Brahminical learning. The great universities 
flourished; ofthese, Nalanda, the most famous of all, was respected 
for its scholarship all over India. To have been to Nalanda was 
a hall-mark of culture. It was not easy to enter that university, 
for admission was restricted to those who had already attained a 
certain standard. It specialized in postgraduate study and attracted 
students from China, Japan, and Tibet, and even it is said, from 
Korea and Mongolia and Bokhara. Apart from religious and 
philosophical subjects (both Buddhist and Brahminical), secular 
and practical subjects were also taught. There was a school of 
art and a department for architecture; a medical school; an agri- 
cultural department; dairy farms and cattle. The intellectual life 
of the university is said to have been one of animated debates and 
discussions. The spread of Indian culture abroad was largely the 
work of scholars from Nalanda. 

Then there was the Vikramshila university, near modern 
Bhagalpur in Bihar, and Vallabhi in Kathiawar. During the 
period of the Guptas, the Ujjayini university rose into promi- 
nence. In the south there was the Amravati university. 

Yet, as the millennium approached its end, all this appears 
to be the afternoon of a civilization; the glow of the morning 
had long faded away, high noon was past. In the south there was 
still vitality and vigour and this lasted for some centuries more; 
in the Indian colonies abroad there was aggressive and full-blood- 
ed life right up to the middle of the next millennium. But the heart 
seems to petrify, its beats are slower, and gradually this petrifica- 
tion and decay spread to the limbs. There is no great figure in 
philosophy after Shankara in the eighth century, though there is 
a long succession of commentators and dialecticians. Even Shan- 
kara came from the south. The sense of curiosity and the spirit 
of mental adventure give place to a hard and formal logic and 
a sterile dialectic. Both Brahminism and Buddhism deteriorate 
and degraded forms of worship grow up, especially some varieties 

223 



of Tantric worship and perversions of the Yoga system. 

In literature,. Bhavabhuti (eighth century) is the last great 
figure. Many books continued to be written, but their style be- 
comes more and more involved and intricate; there is neither 
freshness of thought nor of expression. In mathematics, Bhaskara 
II (twelfth century) is the last great name. In art, E. B. Havell 
takes us rather beyond this period. He says that the form of 
expression was not artistically perfected until about the seventh 
and eighth centuries, when most of the great sculpture and 
painting in India was produced. From the seventh or eighth to the 
fourteenth century, according to him, was the great period of 
Indian art, corresponding to the highest development of Gothic 
art in Europe. He adds that it was in the sixteenth century that 
the creative impulse of the old Indian art began markedly to 
diminish. How far this judgment is correct I do not know, but 
I imagine that even in the field of art it was South India that 
carried on the old tradition for a longer period than the north. 
The last of the major emigrations for colonial settlement took 
place from South India in the ninth century, but the Cholas in 
the south continued to be a great sea power till the eleventh cen- 
tury, when they defeated and conquered Srivijaya. 

We thus see that India was drying up and losing her creative 
genius and vitality. The process was a slow one and lasted several 
centuries, beginning in the north and finally reaching the south. 
What were the causes of this political decline and cultural stagna- 
tion? Was this due to age alone, that seems to attack civilizations 
as it does individuals, or to a kind of tidal wave with its forward 
and backward motion? or were external causes and invasions 
responsible for it? Radhakrishnan says that Indian philosophy 
lost its vigour with the loss of political freedom. SylvainLevi writes: 
'La culture sanscrite a fini avec la liberte de l'lnde; des langues 
nouvelles, des litteratures nouvelles ont envahi la territoire ary- 
enne et Ten ont chasse; elle s'est refugiee dans les colleges et y 
a pris un air pedantesque.' 

All this is true, for the loss of political freedom lead inevit- 
ably to cultural decay. But why should political freedom be lost 
unless some kind of decay has preceded it ? A small country might 
easily be overwhelmed by superior power, but a huge, well- 
developed and highly civilized country like India cannot succumb 
to external attack unless there is internal decay, or the invader 
possesses a higher technique of warfare. That internal decay is 
clearly evident in India at the close of these thousand years. 

There are repeatedly periods of decay and disruption in the 
life of every civilization, and there had been such periods in 
Indian history previously; but India had survived them and 
rejuvenated herself afresh, sometimes retiring into her shell for 
a while and emerging again with fresh vigour. There always 

224 



remained a dynamic core which could renew itself with fresh 
contacts and develop again, something different from the past 
and yet intimately connected with it. Had that capacity for 
adaptation, that flexibility of mind which had saved India so 
often in the past left her now? Had her fixed beliefs and the grow- 
ing rigidity of her social structure made her mind also rigid? For 
if life ceases to grow and evolve, the evolution of thought also 
ceases. India had all along been a curious combination of conser- 
vatism in practice and explosive thought. Inevitably that thought 
affected the practice, though it did so in its own way without 
irreverence for the past. 'Mais si leurs yeux suivaient les mots 
anciens, leur intelligence y voyait des idees nouvelles. L'Inde s'est 
transformee a son insu.' But when thought lost its explosiveness 
and creative power and became a tame attendant on an outworn 
and meaningless practice, mumbling old phrases and fearful of 
everything new, then life became stagnant and tied and constrain- 
ed in a prison of its own making. 

We have many examples of the collapse of a civilization, and 
perhaps the most notable of these is that of the European classical 
civilization which ended with the fall of Rome. Long before Rome 
fell to the invaders from the north, it had been on the verge of 
collapse from its own internal weaknesses. Its economy, once 
expanding, had shrunk and brought all manner of difficulties 
in its train. Urban industries decayed, flourishing cities grew 
progressively smaller and impoverished, and even fertility rapidly 
declined. The Emperors tried many expedients to overcome 
their ever-increasing difficulties. There was compulsory state 
regulation of merchants, craftsmen, and workers, who were tied 
down to particular employments. Many kinds of employment 
were forbidden to those outside certain groups of workers. Thus 
some occupations were practically converted into castes. The 
peasantry became serfs. But all these superficial attempts to check 
the decline failed and even worsened conditions; and the Roman 
Empire collapsed. 

There was and has been no such dramatic collapse of Indian 
civilization, and it has shown an amazing staying power despite 
all that has happened; but a progressive decline is visible. It is 
difficult to specify in any detail what the social conditions in India 
were at the end of the first millennium after Christ; but it may 
be said with some assurance that the expanding economy of India 
had ended and there was a strong tendency to shrink. Probably 
this was the inevitable result of the growing rigidity and exclusive- 
ness of the Indian social structure as represented chiefly by the 
caste system. Where Indians had gone abroad, as in south-east 
Asia, they were not so rigid in mind or customs or in their econo- 
my, and they had opportunities for growth and expansion. For 
another four or five hundred years they flourished in these colonies 

225 



and displayed energy and creative vigour; but in India herself 
the spirit of exclusiveness sapped the creative faculty and deve- 
loped a narrow, small-group, and parochial outlook. Life became 
cut up into set frames, where each man's job was fixed and per- 
manent and he had little concern with others. It was the Kshat- 
riya's business to fight in defence of the country, and others were 
not interested or were not even allowed to do so. The Brahmin 
and the Kshatriya looked down on trade and commerce. Educa- 
tion and opportunities of growth were withheld from the lower 
castes, who were taught to be submissive" to those higher up in the 
scale. In spite of a well-developed urban economy and industries, 
the structure of the state was in many ways feudal. Probably 
even in the technique of warfare India had fallen behind. No 
marked progress was possible under these conditions without 
changing that structure and releasing fresh sources of talent and 
energy. The caste system was a barrier to such a change. For all 
its virtues and the stability it had given to Indian society, it carried 
within it the seeds of destruction. 

The Indian social structure (and I shall consider this more 
fully later) had given amazing stability to Indian civilization. 
It had given strength and cohesion to the group, but this came 
in the way of expansion and a larger cohesion. It developed 
crafts and skill and trade and commerce, but always within each 
group separately. Thus particular types of activity became here- 
ditary and there was a tendency to avoid new types of work and 
activity and to confine oneself to the old groove, to restrict initia- 
tive and the spirit of innovation. It gave a measure of freedom 
within a certain limited sphere, but at the expense of the growth 
of a larger freedom and at the heavy price ofkeeping large numbers 
of people permanently at the bottom of the social ladder, deprived 
of the opportunities of growth. So long as that structure afforded 
avenues for growth and expansion, it was progressive; when it 
reached the limits of expansion open to it, it became stationary, 
unprogressive, and, later, inevitably regressive. 

Because of this there was decline all along the line — intellectual, 
philosophical, political, in technique and methods of warfare, 
in knowledge of and contacts with the outside world, and there 
was a growth of local sentiments and feudal, small-group feeling 
at the expense of the larger conception of India as a whole, and 
a shrinking economy. Yet, as later ages were to show, there was 
yet vitality in the old structure and an amazing tenacity, as well 
as some flexibility and capacity for adaptation. Because of this 
it managed to survive and to profit by new contacts and waves 
of thought, and even progress in some ways. But that progress 
was always tied down to and hampered by far too many relics of 
the past. 



226 



CHAPTER SIX 

NEW PROBLEMS 
The Arabs and the Mongols 



WHILE HARSHA WAS REIGNING OVER A POWERFUL KINGDOM IN 

north India and Hsuan-Tsang, the Chinese scholar-pilgrim, 
was studying at Nalanda University, Islam was taking shape in 
Arabia. Islam was to come to India both as a religious and a 
political force and create many new problems, but it is well to 
remember that it took a long time before it made much differ- 
ence to the Indian scene. It was nearly 600 years before it reached 
the heart of India and when it came to the accompaniment of 
political conquest, it had already changed much and its standard- 
bearers were different. The Arabs who, in a fine frenzy of enthu- 
siasm and with a dynamic energy, had spread out and conquered 
from Spain to the borders of Mongolia carrying with them a 
brilliant culture, did not come to India proper. They stopped at 
its north-western fringe and remained there. Arab civilization 
gradually decayed and various Turkish tribes came into promi- 
nence in central and western Asia. It was these Turkish and 
Afghans from the Indian borderland who brought Islam as a poli- 
tical force to India. 

Some dates might help to bring these facts home to us. Islam 
may be said to begin with the Hijrat, the departure of the Prophet 
Mohammed from Mecca "to Medina, in 622 A.C. Mohammed died 
ten years latter. Some time was spent in consolidating the posi- 
tion in Arabia, and then those astounding series of events took 
place which carried the Arabs, with the banner of Islam, right 
across central Asia in the east and across the whole north African 
continent to Spain and France in the west. In the seventh century 
and by the beginning of the eighth, they had spread over Iraq, 
Iran, and central Asia. In 712 A.C. they reached and occupied 
Sind in the north-west of India and stopped there. A great desert 
separated this area from the more fertile parts of India. In the west 
the Arabs crossed the narrow straits between Africa and Europe 
(since called the Straits of Gibraltar) and entered Spain in 711 
A.C. They occupied the whole of Spain and crossed the Pyrenees 
into France. In 732 they were defeated and checked by Charles 
Martel at Tours in France. 

This triumphant career of a people, whose homelands were 
the deserts of Arabia and who had thus far played no notable 

227 



part in history, is most remarkable. They must have derived 
their vast energy from the dynamic and revolutionary character 
of their Prophet and his message of human brotherhood. And 
yet it is wrong to imagine that Arab civilization suddenly rose 
out of oblivion and took shape after the advent of Islam. There 
has been a tendency on the part of Islamic scholars to decry the 
pre-Islamic past of the Arab people and to refer to it as the period 
of jahiliyat, a kind of dark age of ignorance and supersition. Arab 
civilization, like others, had a long past, intimately connected 
with the development of the Semitic race, the Phoenicians, Cretans, 
Chaldeans, Hebrews. The Israelites became more exclusive and 
separated themselves from the more catholic Chaldeans and 
others. Between them and other Semitic races there were con- 
flicts. Nevertheless all over the Semitic area there were contacts 
and interchanges and to some extent a common background. 
Pre-Islamic Arab civilization grew up especially in Yemen. 
Arabic was a highly developed language at the time of the Pro- 
phet, with a mixture of Persian and even some Indian words. 
Like the Phoenicians, the Arabs went far across the seas in search 
of trade. There was an Arab colony in south China, near Canton, 
in pre-Islamic days. 

Nevertheless it is true that the Prophet of Islam vitalized his 
people and filled them with faith and enthusiasm. Considering 
themselves the standard-bearers of a new cause, they developed 
the zeal and self-confidence which sometimes fills a whole people 
and changes history. Their success was also undoubtedly due to 
the decay of the states in western and central Asia and in north 
Africa. North Africa was torn by internecine conflicts between 
rival Christian factions, leading often to bloody struggles for 
mastery. The Christianity that was practised there at the time 
was narrow and intolerant and the contrast between this and the 
general toleration of the Moslem Arabs, with their message of 
human brotherhood, was marked. It was this that brought whole 
peoples, weary of Christian strife, to their side. 

The culture that the Arabs carried with them to distant coun- 
tries was itself continuously changing and developing. It bore 
the strong impress of the new ideas of Islam, and yet to call it 
Islamic civilization is confusing and probably incorrect. With 
their capital at Damascus, they soon left their simple ways of living 
and developed a more sophisticated culture. That period might 
be called one of Arab-Syrian civilization. Byzantine influences 
came to them, but most of all, when they moved to Baghdad, the 
traditions of old Iran affected them and they developed the Arab- 
Persian civilization which became dominant over all the vast 
areas they controlled. 

Widespread and apparently easy as the Arab conquests were, 
they did not go far beyond Sind in India, then or later. Was 

228 



this due to the fact that India was still strong enough to resist 
effectively the invader? Probably so, for it is difficult to explain 
otherwise the lapse of several centuries before a real invasion 
took place. Partly it may have been due to the internal troubles 
of the Arabs. Sind fell away from the central authority at 
Baghdad and became a small independent Moslem state. But 
though there was no invasion, contacts between India and the 
Arab world grew, travellers came to and from, embassies were 
exchanged, Indian books, especially on mathematics and astro- 
nomy, were taken to Baghdad and were translated into Arabic. 
Many Indian physicians went to Baghdad. These trade and 
cultural relations were not confined to north India. The southern 
states of India also participated in them, especially the RSshtra- 
kutas, on the west coast of India, for purposes of trade. 

This frequent intercourse inevitably led to Indians getting to 
know the new religion, Islam. Missionaries also came to spread 
this new faith and they were welcomed. Mosques were built. 
There was no objection raised either by the state or the people, 
nor were there any religious conflics. It was the old tradition 
of India to be tolerant to all faiths and forms of worship. Thus 
Islam came as a religion to India several centuries before it came 
as a political force. 

The new Arab Empire under the Ommeya Khalifas (Omme- 
yade Caliphs) had its seat and capital at Damascus where a 
splendid city grew up. But soon, about 750 A.C. the Abbasiya 
(Abbaside) Khalifas took the capital to Baghdad. Internal con- 
flicts followed and Spain fell away from the central empire, but 
continued for long as an independent Arab state. Gradually the 
Baghdad Empire also weakened and split up into several states, 
and the Seljuk Turks came from central Asia and became poli- 
tically all-powerful at Baghdad, though the Khalifa still funcioned 
at their pleasure. Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni, a Turk, arose in 
Afghanistan, a great warrior and a brilliant captain, and he 
ignored and even taunted the Khalifa. But still Baghdad continued 
as the cultural centre of the Islamic world and even far-way Spain 
looked to it for inspiration. Europe was backward then in learn- 
ing and science and art and the amenities of life. It was Arab 
Spain, and especially the university of Cordoba, that kept the lamp 
of learning and intellectual curiosity burning throughout those 
dark ages of Europe and some of its light pierced the European 
gloom. 

The Crusades beginning in 1095 A.C. went on for over a century 
and a half. These did not merely represent a struggle between 
two aggressive religions, a conflict between the Cross and the 
Crescent. 'The Crusades,' says Professor G. M. Trevelyan, the 
eminent historian, 'were the military and religious aspect of a 
general urge towards the east on the part of the reviving energies 

229 



of Europe. The prize that Europe brought back from the Crusades 
was not the permanent liberation of the holy Sepulchre or the 
potential unity of Christendom, of which the story of the Crusades 
was one long negation. She brought back instead the finer arts and 
crafts, luxury, science, and intellectual curiosity — everything that 
Peter the Hermit would most have despised.' 

Before the last of the Crusades had ingloriously petered out, 
something cyclonic and cataclysmic had taken place in the heart 
of Asia. Chengiz (or Jenghiz) Khan had begun his devastating 
march westward. Born in Mongolia in 1155 A. a, he started on 
this great march, which was to convert central Asia into a heap 
of smoking ruins, in 1219. He was no youngster then. Bokhara, 
Samarkand, Herat, and Balkh, all great cities, each having more 
than a million inhabitants, were reduced to ashes. Chengiz went 
on to Kiev in Russia and then returned; Baghdad somehow 
escaped as it did not lie on his route. He died in 1227 at the age 
of seventy-two. His successors went further into Europe and, in 
1258, Hulagu captured Baghdad and put an end to that famous 
centre of art and learning, where for over 500 years treasures from 
all parts of the world had come and accumulated. That gave 
a great shock to the distinctive Arab-Persian civilization in Asia, 
though this survived even under the Mongols; it continued es- 
pecially in parts of North Africa and especially in Spain. Crowds 
of scholars with their books fled from Baghdad to Cairo and Spain 
and a renaissance of art and learning took place there. But Spain 
itself was slipping from the Arab grasp and Corodoba had fallen 
in 1236 A.C. For another two centuries and a half the kingdom of 
Granada continued as a bright centre of Arab culture. In 1492 
A.C. Granada also fell to Ferdinand and Isabella, and Arab domi- 
nion in Spain ended. Thenceforward Cairo became the chief Arab 
centre, though it came under Turkish domination. The Ottoman 
Turks had captured Constantinople in 1453, thereby releasing 
those forces which gave birth to the European Renaissance. 

The Mongol conquests in Asia and Europe represented some- 
thing new in the art of warfare. 'In scale and in quality,' says 
Liddell Hart, 'in surprise and in mobility, in the strategic and 
in the .tactical indirect approach their (the Mongols') campaigns 
surpass any in history.' Chengiz Khan was undoubtedly one of 
the greatest, if not the greatest, military leaders that the world 
has produced. The chivalry of Asia and Europe was matchwood 
before him and his brilliant successors, and it was pure chance 
that central and western Europe escaped conquest. From these 
Mongols Europe learnt new lessons in strategy and the art of 
warfare. The use of gunpowder also came to Europe, through 
these Mongols, from China. 

The Mongols did not come to India. They stopped at the Indus 
river and pursued their conquests elsewhere. When their great 

230 



empires faded away a number of smaller states rose in Asia, and 
then in 1369 Timur, a Turk, claiming to be a descendant of 
Chengiz Khan through his mother, tried to repeat the exploits 
ofChengiz. Samarkand, his capital, again became a seat of empire, 
brief-lived though this was. After Timur's death his successors 
were more interested in a quiet life and in cultivating the arts 
than in military exploits. A Timurid renaissance, as it is called, 
took place in central Asia and it was in this environment that 
Babar, a descendant of Timur, was born and grew up. Babar was 
the founder of the Mughal dynasty in India; he was the first of 
the Grand Mughals. He captured Delhi in 1526. 

Chengiz Khan was not a Moslem, as some people seem to ima- 
gine because of his name which is now associated with Islam. 
He is said to have believed in Shamaism, a religion of the sky. 
What this was I do not know but the word inevitably makes one 
think of the Arab word for Buddhists — Samani, which was derived 
from the Sanskrit Shravana. Debased forms of Buddhism flourished 
then in various parts of Asia, including Mongolia and it is probable 
that Chengiz grew up under their influence. 

It is odd to think that the greatest military conqueror in history 
was probably some kind of a Buddhist.* 

In Central Asia, even to-day four legendary figures of great 
conquerors are remembered — Sikander (Alexander), Sultan Mah- 
mud, Chengiz Khan and Timur. To these four must be added now 
a fifth, another type of person, not a warrior, but a conqueror 
in a different realm, round whose name legend has already gathered 
— Lenin. 

The Flowering of Arab Culture and Contacts with India 

Having rapidly conquered large parts of Asia, Africa, and a bit 
of Europe, the Arabs turned their minds to conquests in other 
fields. The empire was being consolidated, many new countries 
had come within their ken and they were eager to find out about 
this world and its ways. The intellectual curiosity, the adventures 
in rationalist speculation, the spirit of scientific inquiry among the 
Arabs of the eighth and ninth centuries are very striking. 

Normally, in the early days of a religion based on fixed concepts 
and beliefs, faith is dominant and variations are not approved 
or encouraged. That faith had carried the Arabs far and that trium- 

*A kind of Shamanism or Shamaism still lingers in Arctic Siberia, Mongolia, and in Ta- 
nna Tuva in Soviet Central Asia. This appears to be based entirely on a belief in spirits and 
has apparently no connection whatever with Buddhism. Tet it may have been influenced 
long ago by some degraded forms of Buddhism which were gradually submerged in local-pri- 
mitive superstitions. Tibet, which is patently a Buddhist country, has developed its own 
avriety of Buddhism called Lamaism. Mongolia with its Shamanism has also the Living 
Buddha tradition. Thus there seem to be various gradations in northern and central Asia of 
Buddhism fading off into primitive beliefs. 

231 



phant success itself must have deepened that faith. And yet we 
find them going beyond the limits of dogma and creed, dabbling 
with agnosticism, and turning their zeal and energy towards 
adventures of the mind. Arab travellers, among the greatest of 
their kind, go to far countries to find out what other peoples were 
doing and thinking, to study and understand their philosophies 
and sciences and ways of life, and then to develop their own thought. 
Scholars and books from abroad were brought to Baghdad and 
the Khalif al-Mansur (middle eighth century) established a re- 
search and translation bureau where translations were made 
from Greek, Syriac, Zend, Latin, and Sanskrit. Old monasteries 
in Syria, Asia Minor, and the Levant were ransacked for manu- 
scripts. The old Alexandrian schools had been closed by Christian 
bishops and their scholars had been driven out. Many of these 
exiles had drifted to Persia and elsewhere. They now found a wel- 
come and a safe haven in Baghdad and they brought Greek philo- 
sophy and science and mathematics with them — Plato and 
Aristotle, Ptolemy and Euclid. There were Nestorian and Jewish 
scholars and Indian physicians; philosophers and mathematicians. 

All this continued and developed during the reigns of the 
Khalifs Harun-al-Rashid and al-Mamun (eighth and ninth 
centuries) and Baghdad became the biggest intellectual centre 
of the civilized world. 

There were many contacts with India during this period and 
the Arabs learnt much of Indian mathematics, astronomy, and 
medicine. And yet, it would appear, that the initiative for all these 
contacts came chiefly from the Arabs and though the Arabs learned 
much from India, the Indians did not learn much from the Arabs. 

The Indians remained aloof, wrapped up in their own conceits, 
and keeping as far as possible within their own shells. This was 
unfortunate, for the intellectual ferment of Baghdad and the Arab 
renaissance movement would have shaken up the Indian mind 
just when it was losing much of its creative vigour. In that spirit 
of intellectual inquiry the Indians of an older days would have 
found kinship in thought. 

The study of Indian learning and science in Baghdad was greatly 
encouraged by the powerful Barmak family (the Barmecides) 
which gave viziers to Harun-al-Rashid. This family had probably 
been converted from Buddhism. During an illness of Harun-al- 
Rashid, a physician named Manak was sent for from India. 
Manak settled down in Baghdad and was appointed the head of 
a large hospital there. Arab writers mention six other Indian 
physicians living in Baghdad at the time, besides Manak. In 
astronomy the Arabs improved on both the Indians and the Alex- 
andrians and two famous names stand out: Al Khwarismi, a 
mathematician and astronomer of the ninth century, and the poet- 
astronomer Omar Khayyam of the twelfth century. In medicine, 

232 



Arab physicians and surgeons were famous in Asia and Europe. 
Most famous of them was Ibn Sina (Avicenna) of Bokhara, who 
was called the Prince of Physicians. He died in 1037 AC. One of 
the great Arab thinkers and philosophers was Abu Nasr Farabi. 
In philosophy the influence of India does not seem to have 
been marked. Both for philosophy and science the Arabs looked 
to Greece and the old Alexandrian schools. Plato and, more espe- 
cially, Aristotle exercised a powerful influence on the Arab mind 
and since then, and up to the present day, they have become more 

in Arabic commentaries than in the original versions, standard 

P 
subjects for study in Islamic schools. Neo-Platonism from 

Alexandria also influenced the Arab mind. The materialist school 
of Greek Philosophy reached the Arabs and led to the rise of 
rationalism and materialism. The rationalists tried to interpret 
religious tenets and injunctions in terms of reason; the materialists 
almost rejected religion altogether. What is noteworthy is the full 
freedom of discussion allowed in Baghdad for all these rival and 
conflicting theories. This controversy and conflict between faith 
and reason spread from Baghdad all over the Arab world and 
reached Spain. The nature of God was discussed and it was stated 
that He cannot have any qualities, such as were commonly attri- 
buted to Him. These qualities were human. To call God bene- 
volent or righteous was, it was suggested, just as pagan and degraded 
as to say that He has a beard. 

Rationalism led to agnosticism and scepticism. Gradually with 
the decline of Baghdad and the growth of the Turkish power, 
this spirit of rationalist inquiry lessened. But in Arab Spain it still 
continued and one of the most famous of Arab philosophers in 
Spain went to the limits of irreligion. This was Ibn Rushd 
(Averroes) who lived in the twelfth century. He is reported to 
have said of the various religions of his time that they were meant 
for children or for fools or they could not be acted upon. Whether 
he actually said so or not is doubtful, but even the tradition shows 
the kind of man he was, and he suffered for his opinions. In many 
ways he was remarkable. He wrote strongly in favour of giving 
women a chance to play a part in public activities and held that 
they were fully capable of justifying themselves. He also suggested 
that incurables and such-like persons should be liquidated as they 
were a burden on society. 

Spain was then far in advance of the other centres of European 
learning and Arab and Jewish scholars from Cordoba were greatly 
respected in Paris and elsewhere. These Arabs evidently had no 
high opinion of the other Europeans. An Arab writer named Said, 
of Toledo, described the Europeans living north of the Pyrenees 
thus: 'They are of a cold temperament and never reach maturity. 
They are of a great stature and of a white colour. But they lack 
all sharpness of wit and penetration of intellect.' 

233 



The flowering of Arab culture and civilization in western and 
central Asia derived its inspiration from two main sources — Arab 
and Iranian. The two mixed inextricably, producing a vigour of 
thought as well as a high standard of living conditions for the 
upper classes. From the Arabs came the vigour and the spirit of 
inquiry; from the Iranians, the graces of life, art, and luxury. 

As Baghdad waned under Turkish domination, the spirit of 
rationalism and inquiry also declined. Chengiz Khan and the 
Mongols put an end to all this. A hundred years later central 
Asia woke up again and Samarkand and Herat became centres 
for painting and architecture, reviving somewhat the old traditions 
of Arab-Persian civilization. But there was no revival of Arab 
rationalism and interest in science. Islam had become a more rigid 
faith suited more to military conquests rather than the conquests 
of the mind. Its chief representatives in Asia were no longer the 
Arabs, but the Turks* and the Mongols (later called Mughals 
in India), and to some extent the Afghans. These Mongols in 
western Asia had become Moslems; in the Far East and in the 
middle regions many took to Buddhism. 

Mahmud of Ghazni and the Afghans 

Early in the eighth century, in 712, the Arabs had reached Sind 
and occupied it. They stopped there. Even Sind fell away from 
the Arab Empire within half a century or so, though it continued 
as a small independent Moselm state. For nearly 300 years there 
was no further invasion of or incursion into India. About 1000 
AC. Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni in Afghanistan, a Turk who had 
risen to power in central Asia, began his raids into India. There 
were many such raids and they were bloody and ruthless, and 
on every occasion Mahmud carried away with him a vast quantity 
of treasure. A scholar contemporary, Alberuni, of Khiva, describes 
these raids: 'The Hindus became like the atoms of dust scattered 
in all directions and like a tale of old in the mouths of people. 
Their scattered remains cherish of course the most inveterate 
aversion towards all Moslems.' 

This poetic description gives us some idea of the devastation 
caused by Mahmud, and yet it is well to remember that Mahmud 
touched and despoiled only a part of north India, chiefly along the 
lines of his marches. The whole of central, eastern, and south India 
escaped from him completely. 

South India at that time and later, was dominated by the 
powerful Chola Empire which controlled the sea routes and had 

* / have often used the word 'Turk' or 'Turki'. This may confuse, as 'Turk' is associated 
now with the people of Turkey, who are descended from the Osmanli or Ottoman Turks. 
Bnt there were other kinds of Turks also — Seljuks, etc. All the Turanian races of Central 
Asia, Chinese Turkestan, etc., may be called Turks or Turkis. 

231 



reached as far as Srivijaya in Java and Sumatra. The Indian 
colonies in the eastern seas were also flourishing and strong. Sea 
power was shared between them and south India. But this did not 
save north India from a land invasion. 

Mahmud annexed the Punjab and Sind to his dominions and 
returned to Ghazni after each raid. He was unable to conquer 
Kashmir. This mountain country succeeded in checking and 
repulsing him. He met with a severe defeat also in the Rajputana 
desert regions on his way back from Somnath in Kathiawar.* 
This was his last raid and he did not return. 

Mahmud was far more a warrior than a man of faith and like 
many other conquerors he used and exploited the name of religion 
for his conquests. India was to him just a place from which he 
could carry off treasure and material to his homeland. He enrolled 
an army in India and placed it under one of his noted generals, 
Tilak by name, who was an Indian and a Hindu. This army he 
used against his own co-religionists in central Asia. 

Mahmud was anxious to make his own city of Ghazni rival the 
great cities of central and western Asia and he carried off from 
India large numbers of artisans and master builders. Building 
interested him and he was much impressed by the city of Mathura 
(modern Muttra) near Delhi. About this he wrote: 'There are 
here a thousand edifices as firm as the faith of the faithful; nor 
is it likely that this city has attained its present condition but at 
the expense of many millions of dinars, nor could such another 
be constructed under a period of 200 years.' 

In the intervals of his fighting Mahmud was interested in 
encouraging cultural activities in his own homeland and he gather- 
ed together a number of eminent men. Among these was the famous 
Persian poet Firdausi, author of the 'Shahnamah', who later fell 
out with Mahmud. Alberuni, a scholar and traveller, was a 
contemporary, and in his books he gives us a glimpse into other 
aspects of life in central Asia then. Born near Khiva, but of Persian 
descent, he came to India and travelled a great deal. He tells us 
df the great irrigation works in the Chola kingdom in the south, 

* There is a curious passage relating to this defeat in an old chronicle in Persian, the Tarikh 
-i- Sorath (translated by Ranchodji Amarji, Bombay, 1882) p. 112: 'Shah Mahmud took 
to his heels in dismay and saved his life, but many of his followers of both sexes were captured.. 
Turk, Afghan, and Mughal female prisoners, if they happened to be virgins, were accepted 
as wives by the. Indian soldiers. . . .The bowels of the others, however, were cleaned by 
means of emetics and purgatives, and thereafter the captives were married to men of similar 
rank' 'Low females were joined to low men. Respectable mm were compelled to shave off 
their beards, and were enrolled among the Shekhavat and the Wadhel tribes of Rajputs; 
whilst the lower kinds were allotted to the castes of Kolis, Khantas, Babrias, and Mers. ' 
I am not myself acquainted with the Tarikh-i-Sorath and do not know how far it can 
be considered as reliable. I have taken this quotation from K. M. Munshi's 'The Glory that 
was Gurjardesa' Part III, p. 140. What is especially interesting is the way foreigners are 
said to have been absorbed into the Rajput clans and even marriages having taken place. The 
cleansing process mentioned is novel. 

235 



though it is doubtful if he visited them himself or went to south 
India. He learnt Sanskrit in Kashmir and studied the religion, 
philosophy, science, and arts of India. He had previously learnt 
Greek in order to study Greek philosophy. His books are not only 
a storehouse of information, but tell us how, behind war and 
pillage and massacre, patient scholarship continued, and how the 
people of one country tried to understand those of another even 
when passion and anger had embittered their relations. That 
passion and anger no doubt clouded judgments on either side, 
and each considered his own people superior to the other. Of 
the Indians, Alberuni says that they are 'haughty, foolishly vain, 
self-contained, and stolid,' and that they believe 'that there is no 
country like theirs, no nation like theirs, no kings like theirs, no 
science like theirs.' Probably a correct enough description of the 
temper of the people. 

Mahmud's raids are a big event in Indian history, though 
politically India as a whole was not greatly affected by them and 
the heart of India remained untouched. They demonstrated the 
weakness and decay of north India, and Alberuni's accounts throw 
further light on the political disintegration of the north and west. 

These repeated incursions from the north-west brought many 
new elements into India's closed thought and economy. Above 
all they brought Islam, for the first time, to the accompaniment of 
ruthless military conquest. So far, for over 300 years, Islam had 
come peacefully as a religion and taken its place among the many 
religions of India without trouble or conflict. The new approach 
produced powerful psychological reactions among the people and 
filled them with bitterness. There was no objection to a new reli- 
gion but there was strong objection to anything which forcibly 
interfered with and upset their way of life. 

India was, it must be remembered, a country of many religions, 
in spite of the dominance of the Hindu faith in its various shapes 
and forms. Apart from Jainism and Buddhism, which had largely 
faded away and been absorbed by Hinduism, there were Christia- 
nity and the Hebrew religion. Both of these had reached India 
probably during the first century after Christ, and both had found 
a place in the country. There were large numbers of Syrian 
Christians and Nestorians in south India and they were as much 
part of the country as anyone else. So were the Jews. And so too 
was the small community of the Zoroastrians who had come to 
India from Iran in the seventh century. So also were many Moslems 
on the west coast and in the north-west. 

Mahmud came as a conqueror and the Punjab became just 
an outlying province of his dominions. Yet when he had esta- 
blished himself as a ruler there, an attempt was made to tone down 
his previous methods in order to win over the people ofthe province 
to some extent. There was less of interference with their ways and 

236 



Hindus were appointed to high office in the army and the 
administration. Only the beginnings of this process are notice- 
able in Mahmud's time; it was to grow later. 

Mahmud died in 1030. More than 160 years passed after his 
death without any other invasion of India or an extension of 
Turkish rule beyond the Punjab. Then an Afghan, Shahab-ud- 
Din Ghuri, captured Ghazni and put an end to the Ghaznavite 
Empire. He marched to Lahore and then to Delhi. But the king 
of Delhi, Prithvi Raj Chauhan, defeated him utterly. Shahab-ud- 
Din retired to Afghanistan and came back next year with another 
army. This time he triumphed and in 1192 he sat on the throne 
of Delhi. 

Prithvi Raj is a popular hero, still famous in song and legend, 
for reckless lovers are always popular. He had carried away the 
girl he loved and who loved him from the very palace of her father, 
Jaichandra, King ofKanauj, defying an assembled host of prince- 
lings who had come to offer court to her. He won his bride for a 
brief while, but at the cost of a bitter feud with a powerful ruler 
and the lives of the bravest on both sides. The chivalry of Delhi 
and central India engaged in internecine conflict and there was 
much mutual slaughter. And so, all for the love of a woman, 
Prithvi Raj lost his life and throne, and Delhi, that seat of empire, 
passed into the hands of an invader from outside. But his love story 
is sung still and he is a hero, while Jaichandra is looked upon 
almost as a traitor. 

This conquest of Delhi did not mean the subjugation of the rest 
of India. The Cholas were still powerful in the south, and there 
were other independent states. It took another century and a half 
for Afghan rule to spread over the greater part of the south. But 
Delhi was significant and symbolic of the new order. 

The Indo-Afghans. South India. Vijayanagar. Babar 
Sea Power 

Indian history has usually been divided by English as well as some 
Indian historians into three major periods: Ancient or Hindu, 
Moslem, and the British period. This division is neither intelligent 
nor correct; it is deceptive and gives a wrong perspective. It deals 
more with the superficial changes at the top than with the essen- 
tial changes in the political, economic, and cultural development 
of the Indian people. The so-called ancient period is vast and full 
of change, of growth and decay, and then growth again. What 
is called the Moslem or medieval period brought another change, 
and an important one, and yet it was more or less confined to the 
top and did not vitally affect the essential continuity of Indian 
life. The invaders who came to India from the north-west, like 
so many of their predecessors in more ancient times, became 

237 



absorbed into India and part of her life. Their dynasties became 
Indian dynasties and there was a great deal of racial fusion by 
intermarriage. A deliberate effort was made, apart from a few 
exceptions, not to interfere with the ways and customs ofthe people. 
They looked to India as their home country and had no other 
affiliations. India continued to be an independent country. 

The coming of the British made a vital difference and the old 
system was uprooted in many ways. They brought an entirely 
different impulse from the west, which had slowly developed in 
Europe from the times of the Renaissance, Reformation, and 
political revolution in England, and was taking shape in the begin- 
nings of the industrial revolution. The American and French 
Revolutions were to carry this further. The British remained out- 
siders, aliens and misfits in India, and made no attempt to be other- 
wise. Above all, for the first time in India's history, her political 
control was exercised from outside and her economy was centered 
in a distant place. They made India a typical colony ofthe modern 
age, a subject country for the first time in her long history. 

Mahmud of Ghazni's invasion of India was certainly a foreign 
Turkish invasion and resulted in the Punjab being separated from 
the rest of India for a while. The Afghans who came at the end of 
the twelfth century were different. They were an Indo-Aryan 
race closely allied to the people of India. Indeed, for long stretches 
of time Afghanistan had been, and was destined to be, a part of 
India. Their language, Pashto, was basically derived from Sanskrit. 
There are few places in India or outside which are so full of ancient 
monuments and remains of Indian culture, chiefly ofthe Buddhist 
period, as Afghanistan. More correctly, the Afghans should be 
called the Indo-Afghans. They differed in many ways from the 
people of the Indian plains, just as the people of the mountain 
valleys of Kashmir differed from the dwellers of the warmer and 
flatter regions below. But in spite of this difference Kashmir had 
always been and continued to be an important seat of Indian 
learning and culture. The Afghans differed also from the more 
highly cultured and sophisticated Arabs and Persians. They were 
hard and fierce like their mountain fastnesses, rigid in their faith, 
warriors not inclined towards intellectual pursuits or adventures 
of the mind. They behaved to begin with as conquerors over a 
rebellious people and were cruel and harsh. 

But soon they toned down. India became their home and Delhi 
was their capital, not distant Ghazni as in Mahmud's time. 
Afghanistan, where they came from, was just an outlying part of 
their kingdom. The process of Indianization was rapid, and many 
of them married women ofthe country. One of their great rulers, 
Alauddin Khilji, himself married a Hindu lady, and so did his son. 
Some ofthe subsequent rulers were racially Turks, such as Qutb- 
ud-Din Aibak, the Sultana Razia, and Iltutmish; but the nobility 

238 



and army continued to be mainly Afghan. Delhi flourished as an 
imperial capital. Ibn Batuta, a famous Arab traveller from 
Morocco, who visited many countries and saw many cities from 
Cairo and Constantinople to China, described it in the fourteenth 
century, perhaps with some exaggeration, as 'one of the greatest 
cities in the universe.' 

The Delhi Sultanate spread southwards. The Chola kingdom 
was declining, but in its place a new sea faring power had grown. 
This was the Pandya kingdom, with its capital at Madura and 
its port at Kayal on the east coast. It was a small kingdom but a 
great centre of trade. Marco Polo twice visited this port on his 
way from China, in 1288 and 1293, and described it 'as a great 
and noble city,' full of ships from Arabia and China. He also men- 
tions the very fine muslins, which 'look like tissues of a spider's web' 
and which were made on the east coast of India. Marco Polo 
tells us also an interesting fact. Large numbers of horses were 
imported by sea from Arabia and Persia into south India. The 
climate of south India was not suited to horse-breeding, and horses, 
apart from their other uses, were necessary for military purposes. 
The best breeding-grounds for horses were in central and western 
Asia, and this may well explain, to some extent, the superiority 
of the central Asian races in warfare. Chengiz Khan's Mongols 
were magnificent horsemen and were devoted to their horses. 
The Turks were also fine horsemen, and the love of the Arab for 
his horse is well-known. In north and west India there are some 
good breeding-grounds for horses, especially in Kathiawar, and 
the Rajputs are very fond of their horses. Many a petty war was 
waged for a famous charger. There is a story of a Delhi Sultan 
admiring the charger of a Rajput chief and asking him for it. 
The Hara chief replied to the Lodi king: 'There are three things 
you must not ask of a Rajput: his horse, his mistress, or his sword,' 
and he galloped away. There was trouble afterwards. 

Late in the fourteenth century, Timur, the Turk or Turco- 
Mongol, came down from the north and smashed up the Delhi 
Sultanate. He was only a few months in India; he came to Delhi 
and went back . But all along his route he created a wilderness 
adorned with pyramids of skulls of those he had slain; and Delhi 
itself became a city of the dead. Fortunately, he did not go far and 
only some parts of the Punjab and Delhi had to suffer this terrible 
affliction. 

It took many years for Delhi to wake up from this sleep of death, 
and even when it woke up it was no longer the capital of a great 
empire. Timur's visit had broken that empire and out of it had 
arisen a number of states in the south. Long before this, early 
in the fourteenth century, two gerat states had risen — Gulbarga, 
called the Bahmani kingdom,* and the Hindu kingdom ofVijaya- 

* The name and origin of the Bahmani Kingdom of the South is interesting. The founder 

239 



nagar. Gulbarga now split up into five states, one of these being 
Ahmadnagar. Ahmad Nizam Shah, the founder of Ahmadnagar 
in 1490, was the son of Nizam-ul-Mulk Bhairi, a minister of the 
Bahmani kings. This Nizam-ul-Mulk was the son of a Brahmin 
accountant named Bhairu (from which his name Bhairi). Thus 
the Ahmednagar dynasty was of indigenous origin, and Chand 
Bibi, the heroine of Ahmednagar, had mixed blood. All the 
Moslem states in the south were indigenous and Indianized. 

After Timur's sack of Delhi, north India remained weak and 
divided up. South India was better off and the largest and most 
powerful of the southern kingdoms was Vijayanagar. This state 
and city attracted many of the Hindu refugees from the north. 
From contemporary accounts it appears that the city was rich and 
very beautiful. 'The city is such that eye has note seen nor 
ear heard of any place resembling it upon the whole earth,' says 
Abdur-Razzak, from central Asia. There were arcades and magni- 
ficent galleries for the bazaars, and rising above them all was the 
palace of the king, surrounded by 'many rivulets and streams 
flowing through channels of cut stone, polished and even.' The 
whole city was full of gardens and because of them, as an Italian 
visitor in 1420, Nicolo Conti, writes, the circumference of the city 
was sixty miles. A later visitor was Paes, a Portuguese who came 
in 1522 after having visited the Italian cities of the Renaissance. 
The city of Vijayanagar, he says, is as 'large as Rome and very 
beautiful to the sight'; it is full of charm and wonder with its 
innumerable lakes and waterways and fruit gardens. It is 'the 
best-provided city in the world' and 'everything abounds.' The 
chambers ofthe palace were a mass ofiyory, with roses and lotuses 
carved in ivory at the top — 'it is so rich and beautiful that you would 
hardly find anywhere another such.' Of the ruler, Krishna Deva 
Raya, Paes writes: 'He is the most feared and perfect king that 
could possibly be, cheerful of disposition and very merry; he is one 
that seek to honour foreigners, and receives them kindly, asking 
about all their affairs whatever their condition may be.' 

While Vijayanagar was flourishing in the south, the petty sulta- 
nate of Delhi had to meet a new foe. Yet another invader came 
down from the northern mountains and on the famous battlefield 
of Panipat, near Delhi, where so often India's fate has been decided, 
he won the throne of Delhi in 1526. This was Babar, a Turco- 
Mongol and a prince of the Timurid line in central Asia. With 
him begins the Mughal Empire of India. 

Babar's success was probably due not only to the weakness of 
the Delhi Sultanate but to his possessing a new and improved type 
of artillery which was not in use in India then. From this period 

of this state was an Afghan Moslem who had a Hindu patron in his early days — Gangu 
Brahmin. In gratitude to him he even took his name and his dynasty was called the Bahmani 
(from Brahmin) dynasty. 

240 



onwards India seems to lag behind in the developing science of 
warfare. It would be more correct to say that the whole of Asia 
remained where it was while Europe was advancing in this science. 
The great Mughal Empire, powerful as it was in India for 200 years, 
probably could not compete on equal terms with European armies 
from the seventeenth century onwards. But no European army 
could come to India unless it had control over the sea routes. The 
major change that was taking place during these centuries was the 
development of European sea power. With the fall of the Chola 
kingdom in the south in the thirteenth century, Indian sea power 
declined rapidly. The small Pandya state, though intimately 
connected with the sea, was not strong enough. The Indian colonies, 
however, still continued to hold command over the Indian Ocean 
till the fifteenth century, when they were ousted by the Arabs, who 
were soon to be followed by the Portuguese. 

Synthesis and Growth of Mixed Culture 
Purdah. Kabir. Guru Nanak. Amir Khusrau 

It is thus wrong and misleading to talk of a Moslem invasion of 
India or of the Moslem period in India, just as it would be wrong 
to refer to the coming of the British to India as a Christian inva- 
sion, or to call the British period in India a Christian period. 
Islam did not invade India; it had come to India some centuries 
earlier. There was a Turkish invasion (Mahmud's), and an 
Afghan invasion, and then a Turco-Mongol or Mughal invasion, 
and of these the two latter were important. The Afghans might 
well be considered a border Indian group, hardly strangers to 
India, and the period of their political dominance should be 
called the Indo-Afghan period. The Mughals were outsiders and 
strangers to India and yet they fitted into the Indian structure with 
remarkable speed and began the Indo-Mughal period. 

Through choice or circumstances or both, the Afghan rulers 
and those who had come with them, merged into India. Their 
dynasties became completely Indianized with their roots in India, 
looking upon India as their homeland, and the rest of the word as 
foreign. In spite of political conflict, they were generally considered 
as such and many even of the Rajput princes accepted them as 
their over-lords. But there were other Rajput chiefs who refused 
to submit and there were fierce conflicts. Feroze Shah, one of the 
well-known Sultans of Delhi, had a Hindu mother; so had Ghyas- 
ud-Din Tughlak. Such marriages between the Afghans, Turkish, 
and the Hindu nobility were not frequent, but they did take place. 
In the south the Moslem ruler of Gulbarga married a Hindu 
princess of Vijayanagar with great pomp and ceremony. 

It appears that in the Moslem countries of central and western 
Asia Indians had a good reputation. As early as the eleventh 

241 



century, that is, before the Afghan conquest, a Moslem geographer, 
Idrisi, wrote: 'The Indians are naturally inclined to justice, and 
never depart from it in their actions. Their good faith, honesty, 
and fidelity to their engagements are well-known, and they are so 
famous for these qualities that people flock to their country from 
every side.'* 

An efficient administration grew up and communications were 
especially improved, chiefly for military reasons. Government was 
more centralized now though it took care not to interfere with local 
customs. Sher Shah (who intervened during the early Mughal 
period) was the ablest among the Afghan rulers. He laid the founda- 
tions of a revenue system which was later to be expanded by Akbar. 
Raja Todar Mai, Akbar's famous revenue minister, was first 
employed by Sher Shah. Hindu talent was increasingly used by 
the Afghan rulers. 

The effect of the Afghan conquest on India and Hinduism was 
two-fold, each development contradicting the other. The immediate 
reaction was an exodus of people to the south, away from the areas 
under Afghan rule. Those who remained became more rigid and 
exclusive, retired into their shells, and tried to protect themselves 
from foreign ways and influences by hardening the caste system. 
On the other hand, there was a gradual and hardly conscious 
approach towards these foreign ways both in thought and life. 
A synthesis worked itself out: new styles of architecture arose; 
food and clothing changed; and life was affected and varied in 
many other ways. This synthesis was especially marked in music, 
which, following its old Indian classical pattern, developed in 
many directions. The Pesrian language became the official court 
language and many Persian words crept into popular use. At the 
same time the popular languages were developed. 

Among the unfortunate developments that took place in India 
was the growth of purdah or the seclusion of women. Why this 
should have been so is not clear but somehow it did result from 
the inter-action of the new elements on the old. In India there had 
been previously some segregation of the sexes among the aristo- 
cracy, as in many other countries and notably in ancient Greece. 
Some such segregation existed in ancient Iran also and to some 
extent all over western Asia. But nowhere was there any strict 
seclusion of women. Probably this started in the Byzantine court 
circles where eunuchs were employed to guard the women's 
apartments. Byzantine influence travelled to Russia where there- 
was a fairly strict seclusion of women right up to Peter the Great's 
time. This had nothing to do with the Tartars who, it is well 
established, did not segregate their women-folk. The mixed Arab- 
Persian civilization was affected in many ways by Byzantine customs 
and possibly the segregation of upper-class women grew to some 

*From Sir H. M. Elliot's 'History of India', Vol. 1, p. 88. 
242 



extent. Yet, even so, there was no strict seclusion of women in 
Arabia or in other parts of western or central Asia. The Afghans, 
who crowded into northern India after the capture of Delhi, had 
no strict purdah. Turkish and Afghan princesses and ladies of the 
court often went riding, hunting, and paying visits. It is an old 
Islamic custom, still to be observed, that women must keep their 
laces unveiled during the Haj pilgrimage to Mecca. Purdah seems 
to have grown in India during Mughal times, when it became a 
mark of status and prestige among both Hindus and Moslems. 
This custom of seclusion of women spread especially among the 
upper classes of those areas where Moslem influence had been 
most marked — in the great central and eastern block comprising 
Delhi, the United Provinces, Rajputana, Bihar, and Bengal. And 
yet it is odd that purdah has not been very strict in the Punjab and 
in the Frontier Province, which are predominantly Moslem. In 
the south and west of India there has been no such seclusion of 
women, except to some extent among the Moslems. 

I have no doubt at all that among the causes of India's decay 
in recent centuries, purdah, or the seclusion of women, holds an 
important place. I am even more convinced that the complete 
ending of this barbarous custom is essential before India can 
have a progressive social life. That it injures women is obvious 
enough, but the injury to man, to the growing child who has to 
spend much of its time among women in purdah, and to social 
life generally is equally great. Fortunately this evil practice is 
fast disappearing among the Hindus, more slowly among the 
Moslems. 

The strongest factor in this liquidation of purdah has been 
the Congress political and social movements which have drawn 
tens of thousands of middle-class women into some kind of 
public activity. Gandhiji has been, and is, a fierce opponent 
of purdah and has called it a 'vicious and brutal custom' which 
has kept women backward and undeveloped. 'I thought of the 
wrong being done by men to the women of India by clinging to 
a barbarous custom which, whatever use it might have had when 
it was first introduced, had now become totally useless and was 
doing incalculable harm to the country.' Gandhiji urged that 
woman should have the "same' liberty and opportunity of self- 
development as man. 'Good sense must govern the relations 
between the two sexes. There should be no barrier erected 
between them. Their mutual behaviour should be natural and 
spontaneous.' Gandhiji has indeed written and spoken with pas- 
sion in favour of women's equality and freedom, and has bitterly 
condemned their domestic slavery. 

I have digressed and made a sudden jump to modern times, 
and must go back to the medieval period after the Afghans had 
established themselves in Delhi and a synthesis was working 

243 



itself out between old ways and new. Most of these changes took 
place at the top, among the nobility and upper classes, and did 
not affect the mass of the population, especially the rural masses. 
They originated in court circles and spread in the cities and 
urban areas. Thus began a process which was to continue for 
several centuries, of developing a mixed culture in north India. 
Delhi, and what are known now as the United Provinces, became 
the centre of this, just as they had been, and still continued to 
be, the centre of the old Aryan culture. But much of this Aryan 
culture drifted to the south, which became a stronghold of Hindu 
orthodoxy. 

After the Delhi Sultanate had weakened owing to Timur's 
incursion, a small Moslem state grew up in Jaunpur (in the 
United Provinces). Right through the fifteenth century this was 
a centre of art and culture and toleration in religion. The grow- 
ing popular language, Hindi, was encouraged, and an attempt 
was even made to bring about a synthesis between the religious 
faiths of the Hindus and the Moslems. About this time in far 
Kashmir in the north an independent Moslem King, Zainul- 
abdin, also became famous for his toleration and his encourage- 
ment of Sanskrit learning and the old culture. 

All over India this new ferment was working and new ideas 
were troubling people's minds. As of old, India was sub-consciously 
reacting to the new situation, trying to absorb the foreign element 
and herself changing somewhat in the process. Out of this ferment 
arose new types of reformers who deliberately preached this 
synthesis and often condemned or ignored the caste system. There 
was the Hindu Ramanand in the south, in the fifteenth century, 
and his still more famous disciple Kabir, a Moslem weaver of 
Benares. Kabir's poems and songs became, and still are, very 
popular. In the north there was Guru Nanak, who is considered 
the founder of Sikhism. The influence of these reformers went 
far beyond the limits of the particular sects that grew up after 
them. Hinduism as a whole felt the impact of the new ideas, and 
Islam in India also became somewhat different from what it was 
elsewhere. The fierce monotheism of Islam influenced Hinduism 
and the vague pantheistic attitude of the Hindu had its effect on 
the Indian Moslem. Most of these Indian Moslems were converts 
bred up in and surrounded by the old traditions; only a compara- 
tively small number of them had come from outside. Moslem 
mysticism, and Sufism, which probably had had it beginnings in 
neo-Platonism, grew. 

Perhaps the most significant indication of the growing absorp- 
tion of the foreign element in India was its use of the popular 
language of the country, even though Persian continued to be 
the court language. There are many notable books written by 
the early Moslems in Hindi. The most famous of these writers 

244 



was Amir Khusrau, a Turk whose family had setded in the 
United Provinces for two or three generations and who lived in 
the fourteenth century during the reigns of several Afghan Sul- 
tans. He was a poet of the first rank in Persian, and he knew 
Sanskrit also. He was a great musician and introduced many 
innovations in Indian music. He is also said to have invented 
the sitar, the popular stringed instrument of India. He wrote 
on many subjects and, in particular, in praise of India, enu- 
merating the various things in which India excelled. Among 
these were religion, philosophy, logic, language, and grammar 
(Sanskrit), music, mathematics, science and the mango fruit! 

But his fame in India rests, above all, on his popular songs, 
written in the ordinary spoken dialect of Hindi. Wisely he did 
not choose the literary medium which would have been under- 
stood by a small coterie only; he went to the villager not only 
for his language but for his customs and ways of living. He sang 
of the different seasons and each season, according to the old 
classical style of India, had its own appropriate tune and words; 
he sang of life in its various phases, of the coming of the bride, 
of separation from the beloved, of the rains when life springs 
anew from the parched earth. Those songs are still widely sung 
and may be heard in any village or town in northern or central 
India. Especially when the rainy season begins and in every 
village big swings are hung from the branches of the mango 
or the peepul trees, and all the village girls and boys gather to- 
gether to celebrate the occasion. 

Amir Khusrau was the author also of innumerable riddles and 
conundrums which are very popular with children as well as 
grown-ups. Even during his long life Khusrau's songs and riddles 
had made him famous. That reputation has continued and 
grown. I do not know if there is any other instance anywhere 
of songs written 600 years go maintaining their popularity and 
their mass appeal and being still sung without any change of 
words. 

The Indian Social Structure. Importance of the Group 

Almost everyone who knows anything at all about India has 
heard of the caste system; almost every outsider and many people 
in India condemn it or criticize it as a whole. Probably there is 
hardly anyone left even in India who approves of it in all its 
present ramifications and developments, though there are undoub- 
tedly many still who accept its basic theory and large numbers 
of Hindus adhere to it in their lives. Some confusion arises in 
the use of the word caste for different people attach different 
meaning to it. The average European, or an Indian who is allied 
to him in thought and approach, thinks of it as just a petrification 

245 



of classes, an ingenious method to preserve a certain hierarchy of 
classes, to keep the upper classes permanently at the top and the 
lower ones permanently at the bottom of the scale. There is truth in 
that and in its origin it was probably a device to keep the Aryan 
conquerors apart from and above the conquered peoples. Undoub- 
tedly in its growth it has acted in that way, though originally 
there may have been a good deal of flexibility about it. Yet that 
is only a part of the truth and it does not explain its power and 
cohesiveness and the way it has lasted down to our present day. 
It survived not only the powerful impact of Buddhism and many 
centuries of Afghan and Mughal rule and the spread of Islam, 
but also the strenuous efforts of innumerable Hindu reformers who 
raised their voices against it. It is only to-day that it is seriously 
threatened and its very basis has been attacked. That is not chiefly 
because of some powerful urge to reform itself which has arisen in 
Hindu society, though such urge is undoubtedly present, nor is 
it because of ideas from the west, though such ideas have certainly 
exerted their influence. The change that is taking place before 
our eyes is due essentially to basic economic changes which have 
shaken up the whole fabric of Indian society and are likely to upset 
it completely. Conditions of life have changed and thought-pat- 
terns are changing so much that it seems impossible for the caste 
system to endure. What will take its place is more than I can say, 
for something much more than the caste system is at stake. The 
conflict is between two approaches to the problem of social 
organisation, which are diametrically opposed to each other: 
the old Hindu conception of the group being the basic unit of 
organisation, and the excessive individualism of the west, empha- 
sizing the individual above the group. 

That conflict is not of India only; it is of the west also and of 
the entire world, though it takes different forms there. The 
nineteenth century civilization of Europe, taking shape in demo- 
cratic liberalism and its extensions in the economic and social 
fields, represented the high-water mark of that individualism. 
That nineteenth century ideology with its social and political 
organization has extended itself and flowed into the twentieth 
century, but it seems wholly out of date now and is cracking 
under stress of crisis and war. The importance of the group and 
the community is emphasized more now, and the problem is to 
reconcile the respective claims of the individual and the group. 
The solution of that problem may take different forms in different 
countries, yet there will be an ever-increasing tendency for one 
basic solution to apply to all. 

The caste system does not stand by itself; it is a pait, and an 
integral part, of a much larger scheme of social organization. 
It may be possible to remove some of its obvious abuses and to 
lessen its rigidity, and yet to leave thfc system intact. But that 

246 



is highly unlikely, as the social and economic forces at play are 
not much concerned with this superstructure; they are attacking 
it at the base and undermining the other supports which held 
it up. Indeed, great parts of these are already gone or are rapidly 
going, and more and more the caste system is left stranded by 
itself. It has ceased to be a question of whether we like caste or 
dislike it. Changes are taking place in spite of our likes and 
dislikes. But it is certainly in our power to mould those changes 
and direct them, so that we can take full advantage of the character 
and genius of the Indian people as a whole, which have been so 
evident in the cohesiveness and stability of the social organization 
they built up. 

Sir George Birdwood has said somewhere: 'So long as the 
Hindus hold to the caste system, India will be India; but from 
the day they break from it, there will be no more India. That 
glorious peninsula will be degraded to the position of a bitter 
"East End" of the Anglo-Saxon Empire.' With caste or without 
it, we have long been degraded to that position in the British 
Empire; and, in any event, whatever our future position is likely 
to be, it will not be confined within the bounds of that empire. 
But there is some truth in what Sir George Birdwood said, though 
probably he did not look at it from this point of view. The break- 
up of a huge and long standing social organization may well lead 
to a complete disruption of social life, resulting in absence of 
cohesion, mass suffering and the development on a vast scale of 
abnormalities in individual behaviour, unless some other social 
structure, more suited to the times and to the genius of the people, 
takes its place. Perhaps disruption is inevitable during the transi- 
tion period; there is enough of this disruption all over the world 
to-day. Perhaps it is only through the pain and suffering that 
accompany such disruption that a people grow and learn the 
lessons of life and adapt themselves anew to changing conditions. 

Nevertheless, we cannot just disrupt and hope for something 
better without having some vision of the future we are working 
for, however vague that vision may be. We cannot just create 
a vacuum, or else that vacuum will fill itself up in a way that 
we may have to deplore. In the constructive schemes that we 
may make, we have to pay attention to the human material we 
have to deal with, to the background of its thought and urges, 
and to the environment in which we have to function. To ignore 
all this and to fashion some idealistic scheme in the air, or merely 
to think in terms of imitating what others have done elsewhere, 
would be folly. It becomes desirable therefore to examine and 
understand the old Indian social structure which has so powerfully 
influenced our people. 

This structure was based on three concepts: the autonomous 
village community, caste, and the joint family system. In all 

247 



these three it is the group that counts; the individual has a 
secondary place. There is nothing very unique about all this 
separately and it is easy to find something equivalent to any of 
these three in other countries, especially in mediaeval times. 
Like the old Indian republics, there were primitive republics 
elsewhere. There was also a kind of primitive communism. The 
old Russian mir might be comparable in some way to the Indian 
village community. Caste has been essentially functional and 
similar to the medieval trade guilds of Europe. The Chinese 
family system bears a strong resemblance to the Hindu joint 
family. I do not know enough of all these to carry the comparison 
far, and, in any case, it is not important for my purpose. Taken 
as a whole the entire Indian structure was certainly unique and, 
as it developed, it became more so. 

Village Self-Government. The Shukra Nitisara 

There is an old book of the tenth century which gives us some 
idea of Indian polity as it was conceived prior to the Turkish 
and Afghan invasions. This is the Nitisara, the Science of Polity, 
by Shukracharya. It deals with the organization of the central 
government as well as of town and village life; of the king's 
council of state and various departments of government. The 
village panchayat or elected council has large powers, both execu- 
tive and judicial, and its members were treated with the greatest 
respect by the king's officers. Land was distributed by this 
panchayat, which also collected taxes out of the produce and paid 
the government's share on behalf of the village. Over a number 
of these village councils there was a larger panchayat or council 
to supervise and interfere if necessary. 

Some old inscriptions further tell us how the members of the 
village councils were elected and what their qualifications and 
disqualifications were. Various committees were formed, elected 
annually, and women could serve on them. In case of misbeha- 
viour, a member could be removed. A member could be dis- 
qualified if he failed to render accounts of public funds. An intere- 
sting rule to prevent nepotism is mentioned: near relatives of 
members were not to be appointed to public office. 

These village councils were very jealous of their liberties and 
it was laid down that no soldier could enter the village unless 
he had a royal permit. If the people complained of an official, 
the Nitisara says that the king 'should take the side, not of his 
officers, but of his subjects.' If many complained then the official 
was to be dismissed, 'for who does not get intoxicated by drink- 
ing of the vanity of office.' The king was to act in accordance 
with the opinion of the majority of the people. 'Public opinion 
is more powerful than the king as the rope made of many fibres 

248 



is strong enough to drag a lion.' 'In making official appoint- 
ments work, character and merit are to be regarded neither caste 
nor family,' and 'neither through colour nor through ancestors 
can the spirit worthy of a Brahmin be geneiated.' 

In the larger towns there were many artisans and merchants, 
and craft guilds, mercantile associations, and banking corpora- 
tions were formed. Each of these controlled its own domestic 
affairs. 

All this information is very fragmentary but it does appear 
from this and many other sources that there was a widespread 
system of self-government in towns and villages and the central 
government seldom interfeied, so long as its quota of taxes was 
paid. Customary law was strong and the political or military 
power seldom interfered with rights based on custom. Originally 
the agrarian system was based on a co-operative or collective 
village. Individuals and families had certain rights as well as 
certain obligations, both of which were determined and pro- 
tected by customary law. 

There was no theocratic monarchy in India. In Indian polity 
if the king is unjust or tyrannical, the right to rebel against him 
is admitted. What the Chinese philosopher, Mencius, said 2,000 
years ago might apply to India: 'When a ruler treats his subjects 
like grass and dirt, then subjects should treat him as a bandit 
and an enemy.' The whole conception of monarchical power 
differed from that of European feudalism, where the king had 
authority over all persons and things in his domain. This authority 
he delegated to lords and barons who vowed allegiance to him. 
Thus a hierarchy of authority was built up. Both the land and 
the people connected with it belonged to the feudal lord and, 
through him, to the king. This was the development of the 
Roman conception of dominium. In India there was nothing of 
this kind. The king had the right to collect certain taxes from 
the land and this revenue-collecting power was all he could 
delegate to others. The peasant in India was not the lord's serf. 
There was plenty of land available and there was no advantage in 
dispossessing the peasant. Thus in India there was no landlord 
system, as known in the west, nor was the individual peasant the 
full owner of his patch of land. Both these concepts were intro- 
duced much later by the British with disastrous results. 

Foreign conquests brought war and destructon, revolts and 
their ruthless suppression, and new ruling classes relying chiefly 
on armed force. This ruling class could often ignore the numer- 
ous constitutional restraints which had always been part of the 
customary law of the country. Important consequences followed 
and the power of the self-governing village communities decreas- 
ed and later various changes were introduced in the land-reve- 
nue system. Nevertheless the Afghan and Mughal rulers took 

249 



special care not to interfere with old customs and conventions 
and no fundamental changes were introduced, and the economic 
and social structure of Indian life continued as before. Ghyas- 
ud-Din Tughlak issued definite instructions to his officials to 
preserve customary law and to keep the affairs of the state apart 
from religion, which was a personal matter of individual pre- 
ference. But changing times and conflicts, as well as the increas- 
ing centralization of government, slowly but progressively les- 
sened the respect given to customary law. The village self- 
governing community, however, continued. Its break-up began 
only under British rule. 

The Theory and Practice of Caste. The Joint Family 

'In India', says Havell, 'religion is hardly a dogma, but a work- 
ing hypothesis of human conduct adapted to different stages of 
spiritual development and different conditions of life.' In the 
ancient days when Indo-Aryan culture first took shape, religion 
had to provide for the needs of men who were as far removed 
from each other in civilization and intellectual and spiritual 
development as it is possible to conceive. There were primitive 
forest-dwellers, fetishists, totem-worshippers and believers in 
every kind of superstition, and there were those who had attained 
the highest flights of spiritual thought. In between, there was 
every shade and gradation of belief and practice. While the 
highest forms of thought were pursued by some, these were wholly 
beyond the reach of many. As social life grew, certain uniformi- 
ties of belief spread, but, even so, many differences, cultural and 
temperamental, remained. The Indo-Aryan approach was to 
avoid the forcible suppression of any belief or the destruction of 
any claim. Each group was left free to work out its ideals along 
the plane of its mental development and understanding. Assimila- 
tion was attempted but there was no denial or suppression. 

A similar and even more difficult problem had to be faced in 
social organization. How to combine these utterly different 
groups in one social system, each group co-operating with the 
whole and yet retaining its own freedom to live its own life and 
develop itself. In a sense — though the comparison is farfetched — 
this may be compared to the numerous minority problems of to-day 
which afflict so many countries and are still far from solution. The 
United States of America solve their minority problems, more or 
less, by trying to make every citizen a 100 per cent American. 
They make everyone conform to a certain type. Other countries, 
with a longer and more complicated past, are not so favourably 
situated. Even Canada has its strong race, religion and language- 
conscious French group. In Europe the barriers are higher and 
deeper. And yet all this applies to Europeans, or those who have 

250 



spread from Europe; people who have a certain common back- 
ground and similarity of culture. Where non-Europeans come 
in, they do not fit this pattern. In the United States, negroes, 
though they may be 100 per cent American, are a race apart, 
deprived of many opportunities and privileges, which others have 
as a matter of course. There are innumerable worse examples 
elsewhere. Only Soviet Russia is said to have solved its problem 
of nationalities and minorities by creating what is called a multi- 
national state. 

If these difficulties and problems pursue us even to-day with 
all our knowledge and progress, how much harder they must 
have been in the ancient days when the Indo-Aryans were 
evolving their civilization and social structure in a land full 
of variety and different types of human beings. The normal 
way to deal with these problems then and later was to exter- 
minate or enslave the conquered populations. This way was 
not followed in India, but it is clear that every precaution was 
taken to perpetuate the superior position of the upper groups. 
Having ensured that superiority, a kind of multiple-community 
state was built up, in which, within certain limits and subject 
to some general rules, freedom was given to each group to follow 
its avocation and live its own life in accordance with its own 
customs or desires. The only real restriction was that it must 
not interfere or come into conflict with another group. This 
was a flexible and expanding system, for new groups could always 
be formed either by newcomers or by dissident members of an 
old group, provided they were numerous enough to do so. Within 
each group there was equality and democracy and the elected 
leaders guided it and frequently consulted the entire group when- 
never any important question arose. 

These groups were almost always functional, each specializing 
in a particular trade or craft. They became thus some kind of 
trade unions or craft-guilds. There was a strong sense of solidarity 
within each, which not only protected the group but sheltered 
and helped an individual member who got into trouble or was 
in economic distress. The functions of each group or caste were 
related to the functions of other castes, and the idea was that 
if each group functioned successfully within its own framework, 
then society as a whole worked harmoniously. Over and above 
this, a strong and fairly successful attempt was made to create, 
a common national bond which would hold all these groups 
together — the sense of a common culture, common traditions, 
common heroes and saints, and a common land to the four 
corners of which people went on pilgrimage. This national bond 
was of course very different from present-day nationalism; it was 
weak politically but, socially and culturally, it was strong. Be- 
cause of its political lack of cohesiveness it facilitated foreign 

251 



conquest; because of its social strength it made recovery easy, 
as well as assimilation of new elements. It had so many heads 
that they could not be cut off and they survived conquest and 
disaster. 

Thus caste was a group system based on services and func- 
tions. It was meant to be an all-inclusive order without any 
common dogma and allowing the fullest latitude to each group. 
Within its wide fold there was monogamy, polygamy, and celi- 
bacy; they were all tolerated, just as other customs, beliefs, and 
practices were tolerated. Life was to be maintained at all levels. 
No minority need submit to a majority, for it could always form 
a separate autonomous group, the only test being: is it a distinc- 
tive group large enough to function as such? Between two groups 
there could be any amount of variation of race, religion, colour, 
culture, and intellectual development. 

An individual was only considered as a member of a group; 
he could do anything he liked so long as he did not interfere 
with the functioning of the group. He had no right to upset that 
functioning, but if he was strong enough and could gather enough 
supporters, it was open to him to form another group. If he could 
not fit in with any group, that meant that he was out ofjoint so 
far as the social activities of the world were concerned. He could 
then become a sanyasi who had renounced caste, every group 
and the world of activity, and could wander about and do what 
he liked. 

It must be remembered that while the Indian social tendency 
was to subordinate the individual to the claims of the group and 
society, religious thought and spiritual seeking have always em- 
phasized the individual. Salvation and knowledge of the ulti- 
mate truth were open to all, to the member of every caste, high 
or low. This salvation or enlightenment could not be a group 
affair; it was highly individualistic. In the search for this salva- 
tion also there were no inflexible dogmas and all doors were 
supposed to lead to it. 

Though the group system was dominant in the organization 
of society, leading to caste, there has always been an individual- 
istic tendency in India. A conflict between the two approaches 
is often in evidence. Partly that individualism was the result of 
the religious doctrine which laid emphasis on the individual. 
Social reformers who criticized or condemned the caste system 
were usually religious reformers and their main argument was 
that the divisions of the caste system came in the way of spiri- 
tual development and that intense individualism to which religion 
pointed. Buddhism was a breakaway from the group-caste ideal 
towards some kind of individualism as well as universalism. But 
this individualism became associated with a withdrawal from 
normal social activites. It offered no effective alternative social 

252 



structure to caste, and so caste continued then and later. 

What were the main castes? If we leave out for a moment 
those who were considered outside the pale of caste, the un- 
touchables, there were the Brahmins, the priests, teachers, intel- 
lectuals; the Kshatriyas or the rulers and warriors; the Vaishyas 
or merchants, traders, bankers, etc.; and the Shudras, who were 
the agricultural and other workers. Probably the only closely 
knit and exclusive caste was that of the Brahmins. The Kshat- 
riyas were frequently adding to their numbers both from foreign 
incoming elements and others in the country who rose to power 
and authority. The Vaishyas were chiefly traders and bankers 
and also engaged in a number of other professions. The main 
occupations of the Shudras were cultivation and domestic service. 

There was always a continuous process of new castes being 
formed as new occupations developed, and for other reasons the 
older castes were always trying to get up in the social scale. 
These processes have continued to our day. Some of the lower 
castes suddenly take to wearing the sacred thread which is sup- 
posed to be reserved for the upper castes. All this really made 
little difference, as each caste continued to function in its own 
ambit and pursued its own trade or occupation. It was merely 
a question of prestige. Occasionally men of the lower classes, 
by sheer ability, attained to positions of power and authority 
in the state, but this was very exceptional. 

The organization of society being, generally speaking, non- 
competitive and non-acquisitive, these divisions into castes did 
not make as much difference as they might otherwise have done. 
The Brahmin at the top, proud of his intellect and learning and 
respected by others, seldom had much in the way of worldly 
possessions. The merchant, prosperous and rich, had no very 
high standing in society as a whole. 

The vast majority of the population consisted of the agricul- 
turists. There was no landlord system, nor was there any pea- 
sant proprietorship. It is difficult to say who owned the land 
in law; there was nothing like the present doctrine of owner- 
ship. The cultivator had the right to till his land and the only 
real question was as to the distribution of the produce of the 
land. The major share went to the cultivator, the king or the 
state took a share (usually one-sixth), and every functional group 
in the village, which served the people in any way, had its share — 
the Brahmin priest and teacher, the merchant, the blacksmith, 
the carpenter, the cobbler, the potter, the builder, the barber, 
the scavenger, etc. Thus, in a sense, every group from the state 
to the scavenger was a shareholder in the produce. 

Who were the depressed classes and the untouchables? The 
'depressed classes' is a new designation applying rather vaguely 
to a number of castes near the bottom of the scale. There is no 

253 



hard and fast line to separate them from the others. The un- 
touchables are more definite. In north India only a very small 
number, engaged in scavenging or unclean work, are considered 
untouchable. Fa-Hsien tells us that when he came the persons 
who removed human faeces were untouchable. In south India 
the numbers are much larger. How they began and grew to such 
numbers it is difficult to say. Probably those who were engaged 
in occupations considered unclean were so treated; later landless 
agricultural labour may have been added. 

The idea of ceremonial purity has been extraordinarily strong 
among the Hindus. This has led to one good consequence and 
many bad ones. The good one is bodily cleanliness. A daily bath 
has always been a essential feature of a Hindu's life, including 
most of the depressed classes. It was from India that this habit 
spread to England and elsewhere. The average Hindu, and even 
the poorest peasant, takes some pride in his shining pots and 
pans. This sense of cleanliness is not scientific and the man who 
bathes twice a day will unhesitatingly drink water that is unclean 
and full of germs. Nor is it corporate, at any rate now. The 
individual will keep his own hut fairly clean but throw all the 
rubbish in the village street in front of his neighbour's house. 
The village is usually very dirty and full of garbage heaps. 
It is also noticeable that cleanliness is not thought of as such but 
as a consequence of some religious sanction. When that religious 
sanction goes, there is marked deterioration in the standards of 
cleanliness. 

The evil consequence of ceremonial purity was a growth of 
exclusiveness, touch-me-notism, and of not eating and drinking 
with people of other castes. This grew to fantastic lengths un- 
known in any other part of the world. It led also to certain 
classes being considered untouchable because they had the mis- 
fortune to do some kinds of essential work which were consi- 
dered unclean. The practice of normally feeding with one's 
own caste people spread to all castes. It became a sign of social 
status and the lower castes stuck to it even more rigidly than 
some of the higher ones. This practice is breaking up now among 
the higher castes but it still continues among the lower castes, 
including the depressed classes. 

If interdining was taboo, much more so was intermarriage 
between castes. Some mixed marriages inevitably took place but 
on the whole it is extraordinary how much each caste kept to 
itself and propagated its own kind. The continuation of racial 
identity through long ages is an illusion and yet the caste sys- 
tem in India has to some extent managed to preserve distinctive 
types, epescially among the higher castes. 

Some groups at the bottom of the scale are sometimes referred 
to as outside the caste groups. As a matter of fact, no group 

254 



not even the untouchables, are outside the framework of the 
caste system. The depressed classes and the untouchables form 
their own castes and have their panchayats or caste councils for 
settling their own affairs. But many of them have been made to 
suffer cruelly by being excluded from the common life of the 
village. 

The autonomous village community and the caste system were 
thus two of the special features of the old Indian social struc- 
ture. The third was the joint family where all the members were 
joint sharers in the common property and inheritance went by 
survivorship. The father or some other elder was the head but he 
functioned as a manager, and not as the old Roman paterfami- 
lias. A division of property was permitted under certain circum- 
stances and if the parties concerned so desired. The joint pro- 
perty was supposed to provide for the needs of all the members 
of the family, workers or non-workers. Inevitably this meant a 
guaranteed minimum for all of them, rather than high rewards 
for some. It was a kind of insurance for all including even the 
subnormal and the physically or mentally deficient. Thus while 
there was security for all, there was a certain levelling down 
of the standard of service demanded as well as of the recom- 
pense given. Emphasis was not laid on personal advantage or 
ambition but on that of the group, that is the family. The fact 
of growing up and living in a large family minimized the ego- 
centric attitude of the child and tended to develop an aptitude 
for socialization. 

All this is the very opposite of what happens in the highly 
individualistic civilization of the west and more especially of 
America, where personal ambition is encouraged and personal 
advantage is the almost universal aim, where all the plums go 
to the bright and pushing, and the weak, timid or second rate 
go to the wall. 

The joint family system is rapidly breaking up in India and 
individualistic attitudes are developing, leading not only to far- 
reaching changes in the economic background of life but also 
to new problems of behaviour. 

All the three pillars of the Indian social structure were thus 
based on the group and not on the individual. The aim was 
social security, stability and continuance of the group, that is 
of society. Progress was not the aim and progress therefore had 
to suffer. Within each group, whether this was the village com- 
munity, the particular caste, or the large joint family, there was 
a communal life shared together, a sense of equality, and demo- 
cractic methods. Even now caste panchayats function democracti- 
cally. It surprised me at one time to see the eagerness of a villager, 
sometimes illiterate, to serve on elected committees for political 
or other purposes. He soon got into the way of it and was a helpful 

255 



member whenever any question relating to his life came up, and 
was not easily subdued. But there was an unfortunate tendency 
for small groups to split up and quarrel among themselves. 

The democratic way was not only well-known but was a com- 
mon method of functioning in social life, in local government, 
trade-guilds, religious assemblies, etc. Caste, with all its evils, 
kept up the democratic habit in each group. There used to be 
elaborate rules of procedure, election and debate. The Marquis 
of Zetland has referred to some of these in writing about the early 
Buddhist assemblies: 'And it may come as a surprise to many to 
learn that in the Assemblies of the Buddhists in India 2,000 or 
more years ago are to be found the rudiments of our own parlia- 
mentary practice of the present day. The dignity of the Assembly 
was preserved by the appointment of a special officer — the embryo 
of "Mr. Speaker" in the House of Commons. A second officer 
was appointed whose duty it was to see that when necessary a 
quorum was secured — the prototype of the parliamentary chief 
whip in our own system. A member initiating business A did so in 
the form of a motion which was then open to discussion. In some 
cases this was done once only, in others three times, thus anticipat- 
ing the practice of parliament in requiring that a Bill be read a 
third time before it becomes law. If discussion disclosed a diffe- 
rence of opinion the matter was decided by the vote of the majority, 
the voting being by ballot.'* 

The old Indian social structure had thus some virtues, and 
indeed it could not have lasted so long without them. Behind 
it lay the philosophical ideal of Indian culture — the integra- 
tion of man and the stress of goodness, beauty and truth rather 
than acquisitiveness. An attempt was made to prevent the join- 
ing together and concentration of honour, power, and wealth. 
The duties of the individual and the group were emphasized, 
not their rights. 

The Smritis (Hindu religious books) give lists of dharmas, 
functions and duties of various castes but none of them contains 
an inventory of rights. Self-sufficiency was aimed at in the group, 
especially in the village and, in a different sense, in the caste. It 
was a closed system, allowing a certain adaptability, change, and 
freedom within its outer framework, but inevitably growing more 
and more exclusive and rigid. Progressively it lost its power to 
expand and tap new sources of talent. Powerful vested interests 
prevented any radical change and kept education from spreading 
to other classes. The old superstitions, known to be such by many 
among the upper classes, were preserved and new ones were added 
to them. Not only the national economy but thought itself became 
stationary, traditional, rigid, unexpansive and unprogressive. 

The conception and practice of caste embodied the aristo- 

* Quoted by G T. Garratt in 'The Ltgacy of India' (1937), p. xi. 
256 



cratic ideal and was obviously opposed to democratic concep- 
tions. It had its strong sense of noblesse oblige, provided people 
[kept to their hereditary stations and did not challenge the estab- 
lished order. India's success and achievements were on the whole 
[confined to the upper classes; those lower down in the scale had 
[very few chances and their opportunities were stricdy limited. 
I These upper classes were not small limited groups but large in 
numbers and there was a diffusion of power, authority and in- 
fluence. Hence they carried on successfully for a very long period. 
But the ultimate weakness and failing of the caste system and the 
Indian social structure were that they degraded a mass of human 
beings and gave them no opportunities to get out of that condi- 
tion — educationally, culturally, or economically. That degrada- 
I tion brought deterioration, all along the line including in its scope 
even the upper classes. It led to the petrification which became a 
dominant feature of India's economy and life. The contrasts 
between this social structure and those existing elsewhere in the 
past were not great, but with the changes that have taken place 
all over the world during the past few generations they have be- 
come far more pronounced. In the context of society to-day, 
the caste system and much that goes with it are wholly incom- 
patible, reactionary, restrictive, and barriers to progress. There 
can be no equality in status and opportunity within its framework, 
nor can there be political democracy and much less economic 
democracy. Between these two conceptions conflict is inherent and 
only one of them can survive. 

Babar and Akbar: The Process of Indianization 

To go back. The Afghans had settled down in India and had 
become Indianized. Their rulers had to face first the problem 
of lessening the hostility of the people and then of winning them 
over. So, as a deliberate policy, they toned down their early 
ruthless methods, became more tolerant, invited co-operation, 
and tried to function not as conquerors from outside but as Indians 
born and bred in the land. What was at first a policy gradually 
became an inevitable trend as the Indian environment influenced 
these people from the north-west and absorbed them. While the 
process continued at the top, more powerful currents arose spon- 
taneously among the people, aiming at a synthesis of thought and 
ways of living. The beginnings of a mixed culture began to appear 
and foundations were laid on which Akbar was to build. 

Akbar was the third of the Mughal dynasty in India, yet it 
was in effect by him that'the empire was consolidated. His grand- 
father, Babai, had won the throne of Delhi in 1526, but he was a 
stranger to India and continued to feel so. He had come from the 
north, where the Timurid Renaissance was flourishing in his 

257 



homelands in central Asia and the influence of the art and culture 
of Iran was strong. He missed the friendly-society he was used to, 
the delights of conversation, the amenities and refinements of | 
life which had spread from Baghdad and Iran. He longed for the 
snow and ice of the northern highlands, for the good flesh and 
flowers and fruits of Ferghana. Yet, with all his disappointment 
at what he saw, he says that Hindustan is a remarkably fine country. 
Babar died within four years of his coming to India, and much 
of his time was spent in fighting and in laying out a splendid 
capital at Agra, for which he obtained the services of a famous 
architect from Constantinople. Those were the days of Suleiman 
the Magnificent in Constantinople, when fine buidings were 
rising up in that city. 

Babar saw little of India and, surrounded as he was by a hostile 
people, missed much. Yet his account tells us of the cultural 
poverty that had descended on north India. Partly this was due 
to Timur's destruction, partly to the exodus of many learned men 
and artists and noted craftsmen to the south. But it was also due 
to the drying up of the creative genius of the Indian people. Babar 
says that there was no lack of skilled workers and artisans, but 
there was no ingenuity or skill in mechanical invention. Also, it 
would appear that in the amenities and luxuries of life India was 
considerably behind Iran. Whether this was due to some inherent 
want of interest in this aspect of life in the Indian mind or to later 
developments, I do not know. Perhaps, as compared with the 
Iranians, the Indians of those days were not so much attracted to 
these refinements and luxuries. If they had cared for them suffi- 
ciently they could have easily got them from Iran, as there was 
frequent intercourse between the two countries. But it is more 
likely that this was a later development, another sign of the cultural 
rigidity and decline of India. 

In earlier periods, as can be seen from classical literature and 
paintings, there was refinement enough and, for those times, 
a high and complicated standard of living. Even when Babar 
came to north India, Vijayanagar in the south had been spoken 
of by many European travellers as representing a very high stand- 
ard of art and culture, refinement and luxury. 

But in north India cultural decay was very evident. Fixed 
beliefs and a rigid social structure prevented social effort and 
advance. The coming of Islam and of a considerable number of i 
people from outside, with different ways of living and thought, 
affected existing beliefs and structure. A foreign conquest, with 
all its evils, has one advantage: it widens the mental horizon 
of the people and compels them to look out of their shells. They 
realise that the world is a much bigger and more variegated 
place than they had imagined. So the Afghan conquest had 
affected India and many changes had taken place. Even more 

258 



so the Mughals, who were far more cultured and advanced in 
ways of living than the Afghans, brought changes to India. In 
particular, they introduced the refinements for which Iran was 
famous, even to the extent of the highly artificial and strictly 
prescribed court life, which influenced the ways of living of the 
nobility. The Bahmani kingdom in the south had direct con- 
tacts with Iran via Calicut. 

There were many changes in India and new impulses brought 
freshness and life to art and architecture and other cultural 
patterns. And yet all this was the result of two old-world pat- 
terns coming into contact, both of which had lost their initial 
vitality and creative vigour and were set in rigid frames. Indian 
culture was very old and tired, the Arab-Persian culture had 
long passed its zenith and the old curiosity and sense of mental 
adventure which distinguished the Arabs were no more in evidence. 

Babar is an attractive person, a typical Renaissance prince, 
bold and adventurous, fond of art and literature and good living. 
His giandson, Akbar, is even more attractive and has greater 
qualities. Daring and reckless, an able general, and yet gentle 
and full of compassion, an idealist and a dreamer, but also a man 
of action and a leader of men who roused the passionate loyalty 
of his followers. As a warrior he conquered large parts of India, 
but his eyes were set on another and more enduring conquest, the 
conquest of the minds and hearts of the people. Those compelling 
eyes of his were 'vibrant like the sea in sunshine,' as Portuguese 
Jesuits of his court have told us. In him the old dream of a united 
India again took shape, united not only politically in one state 
but organically fused into one people. 

Throughout his long reign of nearly fifty years from 1556 on- 
wards he laboured to this end. Many a proud Rajput chief, who 
would not have submitted to any other person, he won over to 
his side. He married a Rajput princess, and his son and successor, 
Jehangir, was thus a half Mughal and halfRajput Hindu. Jehangir's 
son, Shah Jehan, was also the son of a Rajput mother. Thus racially 
this Turko-Mongol dynasty became far more Indian than Turk 
or Mongol. 

Akbar was an admirer of and felt a kinship with the Rajputs, 
and by his matrimonial and other policy he formed an alliance 
with the Rajput ruling classes which strengthened his empire 
greatly. This Mughal-Rajput co-operation, which continued in 
subsequent reigns, affected not only government and the adminis- 
tration and army, but also art, culture, and ways of living. The 
Mughal nobility became progressively Indianized and the Rajputs 
and others were influenced by Persian culture. 

Akbar won many people to his side and kept them there, but 
he failed to subdue the proud and indomitable spirit of Rana 
Pratap of Mewar in Rajputana, who preferred to lead a hunted 

259 



life in the jungle rather than give even formal allegiance to one 
he considered a foreign conqueror. 

Round himself Akbar collected a brilliant group of men, devoted 
to him and to his ideals. Among these were the two famous brothers 
Fyzee and Abul Fazl, Birbal, Raja Man Singh, and Abdul Rahim 
Khankhana. His court became a meeting place for men of all 
faiths and all who had some new idea or new invention. His 
toleration of views and his encouragement of all kinds of beliefs 
and opinions went so far as to anger some of the more orthodox 
Moslems. He even tried to start a new synthetic faith to suit 
everybody. It was in his reign that the cultural amalgamation of 
Hindu and Moslem in north India took a long step forward. 
Akbar himself was certainly as popular with the Hindus as with 
the Moslems. The Mughal dynasty became firmly established as 
India's own. 

The Contrast between Asia and Europe in 
Mechanical Advance and Creative Energy 

Akbar was full of curiosity, ever seeking to find out about things, 
both spiritual and temporal. He was interested in mechanical 
contrivances and in the science of war. He prized war-elephants 
especially, and they formed an important part of his army. The 
Portuguese Jesuits of his court tell us that 'he was interested in 
and curious to learn about many things, and possessed an inti- 
mate knowledge not only of military and political matters, but 
many of the mechanical arts.' In 'his eagerness for knowledge' 
he 'tried to learn everything at once, like a hungry man trying 
to swallow his food at a single gulp'. 

And yet it is very odd how his curiosity stopped at a point and 
did not lead him to explore certain obvious avenues which lay 
open before him. With all his great prestige as the Great Mughal 
and the strength of his empire as a land power, he was powerless 
at sea. Vasco de Gama had reached Calicut, via the Cape, in 
1498; Albuquerque had seized Malacca in 1511 and established 
Portuguese sea power in the Indian Ocean. Goa on the western 
coast of India had become a Portuguese possession. All this did 
not bring the Portuguese into direct conflict with Akbar. But 
Indian pilgrims going to Mecca by sea, and these sometimes 
included members of the imperial family, or of the nobility, were 
often held up for ransom by the Portuguese. It was obvious that 
however powerful Akbar might be on land, the Portuguese were 
masters of the sea. It is not difficult to understand that a con- 
tinental power did not attach much importance to sea power, 
although, as a matter of fact, India's greatness and importance 
in the past had been partly due to her control of the sea routes. 
Akbar had a vast continent to conquer and had little time to 

260 



spare for the Portuguese, to whom he attached no importance 
even though they stung him occasionally. He did think of build- 
ing ships once, but this was looked upon more as a pastime than 
a serious naval development. 

Again, in the matter of artillery the Mughal armies, as well as 
those of other states in India at the rime, chiefly relied on fore- 
ign experts, who were usually Turks from the Ottoman domi- 
nions. The Master of the Artillery came to be known by the title 
of Rumi Khan — Rum being eastern Rome, that is, Constanti- 
nople. These foreign experts trained local men, but why did not 
Akbar or anyone else send his own men abroad for training or 
interest himself in improvement by encouraging research work? 

Yet another very significant thing. The Jesuits presented Akbar 
with a printed Bible and perhaps one or two other printed books. 
Why did he not get curious about printing, which would have 
been of tremendous advantage to him in his governmental activi- 
ties as well as in his vast enterprises? 

Again, clocks. These were very popular with the Mughal 
nobility, and they were brought by the Portuguese and later by 
the English from Europe. They were regarded as luxuries for the 
rich, the ordinary people being content with sundials and sand- 
and water-clocks. No attempt was made to understand how these 
spring clocks were made or to get them made in India. This lack 
of mechanical bent is remarkable, especially as there were very 
fine craftsmen and artisans in India. 

It is not in India alone that this paralysis of creative energy 
and inventive faculty is visible during this period. The whole of 
western and central Asia suffered from it even more. I do not 
know about China but I imagine that some such stagnation affected 
her also. It must be remembered that both in India and China, 
during earlier periods, there was considerable progress in various 
departments of science. Shipbuilding and an extensive sea-trade 
acted as a constant spur even to mechanical improvements. It 
is true that no major mechanical development took place in either 
of these countries or in any other country at the time. The world 
of the fifteenth century was, from this point of view, not very 
different from what it had been a thousand or two thousand years 
earlier. 

The Arabs, who had developed to some extent the early begin- 
nings of practical science and had advanced knowledge in many 
ways during the dark period of the middle ages in Europe, became 
unimportant and backward. It is said that some of the earliest 
clocks were made by the Arabs in the seventh century. Damascus 
had a famous clock and so did the Baghdad of Harun-al-Rashid's 
day. But with the decline of the Arabs the art of making clocks 
also disappeared from these countries, although it was progressing 
in some of the European countries where clocks were not rarities. 

261 



Long before Caxton, the Moorish Arabs of Spain used to print 
from wooden blocks.* This was done by the state for duplication 
of official orders. Printing there does not seem to have advanced 
beyond the block stage and even that faded away later. The 
Ottoman Turks, who for long were the dominant Moslem power in 
Europe and western Asia, completely'ignored printing for many 
centuries, although printed books were being produced in large 
numbers in Europe, right at their very threshold. They must have 
known about them, but the incentive to utilize this great invention 
was totally lacking. Partly also religious sentiment was opposed 
to it, as it was considered that it was sacrilegious to print their 
holy book, the Koran. The printed sheets might be put to impro- 
per use or stepped upon or thrown into the rubbish heap. It was 
Napoleon who first introduced the printing press into Egypt and 
from there it spread very gradually and slowly into the other Arab 
countries. 

While Asia had become dormant, exhausted, as it were, by its 
past efforts, Europe, backward in many ways, was on the thres- 
hold of vast changes. A new spirit, a new ferment, was at work 
sending her adventurers across the oceans and turning the minds 
of her thinkers in novel directions. The Renaissance had done 
little for the advancement of science; to some extent it turned 
people away from science, and the humanistic conservative edu- 
cation which it introduced in the universities prevented the 
spread of even well-known scientific ideas. It is stated that the 
majority of educated English people, as late as the middle of 
the eighteenth century, declined to believe that the earth rotated 
or that it revolved round the sun, in spite of Copernicus, Galileo, 
and Newton; and the manufacture of good telescopes. Bred up in 
the Greek and Latin classics, they still clung to Ptolemy's earth- 
centred universe. That eminent English statesman of the nine- 
teenth ceruury, Mr. W. E. Gladstone, in spite of his deep erudition, 
neither understood nor was attracted to science. Even to-day 
probably there are many statesmen and public men (and not in 
India only) who know little of science or the scientific method, 
though they live in a world governed by the applications of science 
and themselves use it for large-scale slaughter and destruction. 

The Renaissance had, however, released the mind of Europe 
from many of its old fetters and destroyed many an idol that it 
had cherished. Whether it was partly and indirectly due to the 
Renaissance or whether it was in spite of it, a new spirit of objec- 
tive inquiry was making itself felt, a spirit which not only challen- 
ged old-established authority, but also abstractions and vague 

*/ do not know how this kind of printing reached the Arabs in Spain. Probably it came to 
them via the Mongols from China, long before it reached northern and western Europe. The 
Arab worldfrom Cordoba to Cairo, Damascus and Baghdad, had frequent contacts with 
China even before the Mongols appeared upon the scene. 

262 



speculations. Francis Bacon has written that 'the roads to human 
power and to human knowledge lie close together, and are nearly 
the same, nevertheless on account of the pernicious and inveterate 
habit of dwelling on abstractions it is safer to begin and raise the 
sciences from those foundations which have relation to practice 
and let the active part be as a seal which prints and determines 
the contemplative counterpart.' And later in the seventeenth 
century, Sir Thomas Browne has said: 'But the mortallest enemy 
unto knowedge, and that which hath done the greatest execution 
upon truth, hath been a peremptory adhesion to authority;-and 
more especially, the establishing of our belief upon the dictates of 
antiquity. For (as every capacity may observe) most men, of ages 
present, so superstitiously do look upon ages past, that the authori- 
ties of the one exceed the reasons of the other. Whose persons 
indeed far removed from our times, their works, which seldom 
with us pass uncontrolled, either by contemporaries, or imme- 
diate successors, are now become out of the distance of envies; 
and the further removed from present times, are conceived to 
approach the nearer unto truth itself. Now hereby me thinks 
we manifestly delude ourselves, and widely walk out of the track 
of truth.' 

Akbar's century was the sixteenth, which saw in Europe the 
birth of dynamics, a revolutionary advance in the life of huma- 
nity. With that discovery Europe forged ahead, slowly at first, 
but with an ever-increasing momentum, till in the nineteenth 
century it shot forward and built a new world. While Europe 
was taking advantage of, and exploiting the powers of nature, 
Asia, static and dormant, still carried on in the old traditional 
way, relying on man's toil and labour. 

Why was this so? Asia is too big and varied a place for a single 
answer. Each country, especially such vast countries as China 
and India, must be judged separately. China was certainly then 
and later more cultured and her people led a more civilized life 
than any in Europe. India, to all outward seeming, also presented 
the spectacle, not only of a brilliant court, but of thriving trade, 
commerce, manufactures, and crafts. In many respects the 
countries of Europe would have seemed backward and rather 
crude to an Indian visitor then. And yet the dynamic quality 
which was becoming evident in Europe was almost wholly absent 
in India. 

A civilization decays much more from inner failure than from 
an external attack. It may fail because in a sense it has worked 
itself out and has nothing more to offer in a changing world, or 
because the people who represent it deteriorate in quality and 
can no longer support the burden worthily. It may be that the 
social culture is such that it becomes a bar to advance beyond 
a certain point, and further advance can only take place after 

263 



that bar has been removed or some essential qualitative varia- 
tion in that culture has been introduced. The decay of Indian 
civilization is evident enough even before the Turkish and Afghan 
invasions. Did the impact of these invaders and their new ideas 
with the old India produce a new social context, thus unbinding 
the fetters of the intellect and releasing fresh energy? 

To some extent this happened, and art and architecture, 
painting, and music, and the ways of life were affected. But those 
consequences did not go deep enough; they were more or less 
superficial, and the social culture remained much the same as 
it used to be. In some respects indeed it became more rigid. 
The Afghans brought no new element of progress; they repre- 
sented a backward feudal and tribal order. India was not feudal 
in the European sense, but the Rajput clans, who were the 
backbone of Indian defence, were organized in some kind of a 
feudal way. The Mughals were also semi-feudal but with a strong 
monarchical centre. This monarchy triumphed over the vague 
feudalism of Rajputana. 

Akbar might have laid, the foundations of social change if his 
eager, inquisitive mind had turned in that direction and sought 
to find out what was happening in other parts of the world. But 
he was too busy consolidating his empire and the big problem that 
faced him was how to reconcile a proselytizing religion like Islam 
with the national religion and customs of the people, and thus to 
build up national unity. He tried to interpret religion in a rational 
spirit and for the moment he appeared to have brought about a 
remarkable transformation of the Indian scene. But this direct 
approach did not succeed, as it has seldom succeeded elsewhere. 

So not even Akbar made any basic difference to that social 
context of India, and after him the air of change and mental 
adventure which he had introduced subsided, and India resumed 
her static and unchanging life.* 



*Abul Fazl tells us that Akbar had heard of the discovery of America by Columbus. In the 
next reign, Jehangir's, tobacco from America reached India, via Europe. It had an imme- 
diate and amazing vogue in spite of Jehangir's efforts to suppress it. Throughout the Mughal 
period India had intimate contacts with central Asia. These contacts extended to Russia 
and there are references to diplomatic and trade missions. A Russian friend has drawn my 
attention to such refrences in Russian chronicles. In 1532 an envoy of the Emperor Babar, 
named Khoja Husain, arrived in Moscow to conclude a treaty of friendship. During the 
reign of Tsar Michael Fedorovitch (1613-1645) Indian traders settled on the Volga. In 
1625 an Indian serai was built in Astrakhan by order of the military governor. Indian 
craftsmen and especially weavers were invited to Moscow. In 1695 Semean Melenky, a 
Russian trade-agent, visited Delhi and was received by Aurangzeb. In 1722 Peter the Great 
visited Astrakhan and granted interviews to Indian traders. In 1 745 a party of Indian 
sadhus, described as hermits, arrived in Astrakhan. Two of these sadhus settled in Rtissia 
and became Russian subjects. 

264 



Development of a Common Culture 

Akbar had built so well that the edifice he had erected lasted 
for another 100 years in spite of inadequate successors. After 
almost every Mughal reign there were wars between the princes 
for the throne, thus weakening the central power. But the court 
continued to be brilliant and the fame of the Grand Mughal 
spread all over Asia and Europe. Beautiful buildings combining 
the old Indian ideals in architecture with a new simplicity and 
a nobility of line grew up in Agra and Delhi. This Indo-Mughal 
art was in marked contrast with the decadent, over-elaborate 
and heavily ornamented temples and other buildings of the 
north and south. Inspired architects and builders put up with 
loving hands the Taj Mahal at Agra. 

The last of the so-called 'Grand Mughals,' Aurungzeb, tried 
to put back the clock, and in this attempt stopped it and broke 
it up. The Mughal rulers were strong so long as they put them- 
selves in line with the genius of the nation and tried to work 
for a common nationality and a synthesis of the various elements 
in the country. When Aurungzeb began to oppose this move- 
ment and suppress it and to function more as a Moslem than 
an Indian ruler, the Mughal Empire began to break up. The 
work of Akbar, and to some extent his successors, was undone 
and the various forces that had been kept in check by Akbar's 
policy broke loose and challenged that empire. New movements 
arose, narrow in outlook but representing a resurgent nation- 
alism, and though they were not strong enough to build perma- 
nently, and circumstances were against them, they were capable 
of destroying the Empire of the Mughals. 

The impact of the invaders from the north-west and of Islam 
on India had been considerable. It had pointed out and shown 
up the abuses that had crept into Hindu society — the petrifac- 
tion of caste, untouchability, exclusiveness carried to fantastic 
lengths. The idea of the brotherhood of Islam and of the theo- 
retical equality of its adherents made a powerful appeal, espe- 
cially to those in the Hindu fold who were denied any semblance 
of equal treatment. From this ideological impact grew up vari- 
ous movements aiming at a religious synthesis. Many conversions 
also took place but the great majority of these were from the 
lower castes, especially in Bengal. Some individuals belonging 
to the higher castes also adopted the new faith, either because 
of a real change of belief, or, more often, for political and econo- 
mic reasons. There were obvious advantages in accepting the 
religion of the ruling power. 

In spite of these widespread conversions, Hinduism, in all its 
varieties, continued as the dominant faith of the land, solid, 
exclusive, self-sufficient, and sure of itself. The upper castes had 

265 



no doubt about their own superiority in the realm of ideas and 
thought and considered Islam as a rather crude approach to 
the problems of philosophy and metaphysics. Even the mono- 
theism of Islam they found in their own religion, together with 
monism which was the basis of much of their philosophy. Each 
person could take his choice of these or of more popular and 
simpler forms of worship. He could be a Vaishnavite and believe 
in a personal God and pour out his faith to him. Or more 
philosophically inclined, he could wander in the tenuous realms 
of metaphysics and high philosophy. Though all their social 
structure was based on the group, in matters of religion they 
were highly individualistic, not believing in proselytization them- 
selves and caring little if some people were converted to another 
faith. What was objected to was in interference with their own 
social structure and ways of living. If another group wanted to 
function in its own way, it was at liberty to do so. It is worth 
noting that, as a rule, conversions to Islam were group conversions, 
so powerful was the influence of the group. Among the upper 
castes individuals might change their religion, but lower down 
the scale a particular caste in a locality, or almost an entire village 
would be converted. Thus their group life as well as their functions 
continued as before with only minor variations as regards worship, 
etc. Because of this we find to-day particular occupations and 
crafts almost entirely monopolized by Moslems. Thus the class 
of weavers is predominantly, and in large areas wholly Moslem. 
So also used to be shoe-merchants and butchers. Tailors are almost 
always Moslems. Various kinds of artisans and craftsmen are 
Moslems. Owing to the breaking up of the group system, many 
individuals have taken to other occupations and this has somewhat 
obliterated the line dividing the various occupational groups. 
The destruction of crafts and village industries, originally delibe- 
rately undertaken under early British rule and later resulting from 
the development of a new colonial economy, led to vast numbers 
of these artisans and craftsmen, more especially the weavers, 
being deprived of their occupations and livelihood. Those who 
survived this catastrophe drifted to the land and became landless 
labourers or shared a tiny patch of land with their relations. 

Conversions to Islam in those days, whether individual or 
group, probably aroused no particular opposition, except when 
force or some kind of compulsion was used. Friends and rela- 
tives or neighbours might disapprove, but the Hindu commu- 
nity as such apparently attached little importance to this. In 
contrast with this indifferent attitude, conversions to-day attract 
widespread attention and are resented, whether they are to 
Islam or Christianity. This is largely due to political factors 
and especially to the introduction of separate religious electo- 
rates. Each convert is supposed to be a gain to the communal 

266 



group leading ultimately to greater representation and more 
political power. Attempts are even made to manipulate the 
census to this end. Apart from political reasons, there has also 
been a growth in Hinduism of a tendency to proselytize and 
convert non-Hindus to Hinduism. This is one of the direct 
effects of Islam on Hinduism, though in practice it brings it 
into conflict with Islam in India. Orthodox Hindus still do not 
approve of it. 

In Kashmir a long-continued process of conversion to Islam 
had resulted in 95 per cent of the population becoming Mos- 
lems, though they retained many of their old Hindu customs. 
In the middle nineteenth century the Hindu ruler of the state 
found that very large numbers of these people were anxious or 
willing to return en bloc to Hinduism. He sent a deputation 
to the pundits of Benares inquiring if this could be done. The 
pundits refused to countenance any such change of faith and 
there the matter ended. 

The Moslems who came to India from outside brought no 
new technique or political and economic structure. In spite of a 
religious belief in the brotherhood of Islam, they were class 
bound and feudal in outlook. In technique and in the methods 
of production and industrial organization, they were inferior 
to what prevailed then in India. Thus their influence on the 
economic life of India and the social structure was very little. 
This life continued as of old and all the people, Hindu or Moslem 
or others, fitted into it. 

The position of women deteriorated. Even the ancient laws 
had been unfair to them in regard to inheritance and their 
position in the household — though even so they were fairer than 
nineteenth-century English law. Those laws of inheritance deriv- 
ed from the Hindu joint family system and sought to protect 
joint property from transfer to another family. A woman by 
marriage changed her family. In an economic sense she was 
looked upon as a dependant of her father or husband or son, 
but she could and did hold property in her own right. In many 
ways she was honoured and respected and had a fair measure 
of freedom, taking part in social and cultural activities. Indian 
history is full of the names of famous women, including thinkers 
and philosophers, rulers and warriors. This freedom grew pro- 
gressively less. Islam had a fairer law of inheritance but this 
did not affect Hindu women. What did affect many of them to 
their great disadvantage, as it affected Moslem women to a much 
greater degree, was the intensification of the custom of seclusion 
of women. This spread among the upper classes all over the north 
and in Bengal, but the south and west of India escaped this 
degrading custom. Even in the north, only the upper classes 
indulged in it and the masses were happily free from it. Women 

267 



now had less chances of education and their activities were 
largely confined to the household.* Lacking most other ways of 
distinguishing themselves, living a confined and restricted life, 
they were told that their supreme virtue lay in chastity and the 
supreme sin in a loss of it. Such was the man-made doctrine, but 
man did not apply it to himself. Tulsidas in his deservedly 
famous poems, the Hindi Ramayana, written during Jehangir's 
time, painted a picture of woman which is grossly unfair and 
prejudiced. 

Partly because the great majority of Moslems in India were 
converts from Hinduism, partly because of long contact, Hindus 
and Moslems in India developed numerous common traits, 
habits, ways of living and artistic tastes, especially in northern 
India — in music, painting, architecture, food, clothes, and com- 
mon traditions. They lived together peacefully as one people, 
joined each other's festivals and celebrations, spoke the same 
language, lived in more or less the same way, and faced iden- 
tical economic problems. The nobility and the landed gentry 
and their numerous hangers-on took their cue from the court. 
(These people were not landlords or owners of the land. They 
did not take rent but were allowed to collect and retain the state 
revenue for a particular area. These grants were usually for life.) 
They developed a highly intricate, and sophisticated common 
culture. They wore the same kind of clothes, ate the same type 
of food, had common artistic pursuits, military pastimes, hunting, 
chivalry, and games. Polo was a favourite game and elephant 
fights were popular. 

All this intercourse and common living took place in spite of 
the caste system which prevented fusion. There were no inter- 
marriages except in rare instances and even then it was not fusion 
but usually the transfer of a Hindu woman to the Moslem fold. 
Nor was there inter-dining but this was not so strict. The seclusion 
of women prevented the development of social life. This applied 
even more to Moslems inter se for purdah among them was stricter. 
Though Hindu and Moslem men met each other frequently, such 
opportunities were lacking to the women of both groups. These 
women of the nobility and upper classes were thus far more cut 
off from each other and developed much more marked separate 
ideological groups, each largely ignorant of the other. 

Among the common people in the villages, and that means 
the vast majority of the population, life had a much more cor- 
porate and joint basis. Within the limited circle of the village 
there was an intimate relationship between the Hindus and 
Moslems. Caste did not come in the way and the Hindus looked 

'And yet many instances of notable women, scholars as well as rulers, occur even 
during this period and later. In the eighteenth century Lakshmi Devi wrote a great legal 
commentary on the Mitakshara, a famous law book of the medieval period. 

268 



upon the Moslems as belonging to another caste. Most of the 
Moslems were converts who were still full of their old tradi- 
tions. They were well acquainted with the Hindu background, 
mythology, and epic stories. They did the same kind of work, 
lived similar lives, wore the same kind of clothes, spoke the same 
language. They joined each other's festivals, and some semi- 
religious festivals were common to both. They had common 
folk-songs. Mostly these people were peasants and artisans and 
craftsmen. 

The third large group, in between the nobility and the pea- 
santry and artisans, was the merchant and trader class. This was 
predominantly Hindu and though it had no political power, the 
economic structure was largely under its control. This class had 
fewer intimate contacts with the Moslems than any other class, 
above it or below. The Moslems who had come from outside 
India were feudal in outlook and did not take kindly to trade. 
The Islamic prohibition against the taking of interest also came 
in the way of trade. They considered themselves the ruling class, 
the nobility and functioned as state officials, holders of grants 
of land or as officers in the army. There were also many scholars 
attached to the court or in charge of theological and other aca- 
demies. 

During the Mughal period large numbers of Hindus wrote 
books in Persian which was the official court language. Some 
of these books have become classics of their kind. At the same 
time Moslem scholars translated Sanskrit books into Persian 
and wrote in Hindi. Two of the best-known Hindi poets are Malik 
Mohammad Jaisi who wrote the 'Padmavat' and Abdul Rahim 
Khankhana, one of the premier nobles of Akbar's court and 
son of his guardian. Khankhana was a scholar in Arabic, Persian, 
and Sanskrit, and his Hindi poetry is of a high quality. For 
sometime he was the commander-in-chief of the imperial army, 
and yet he has written in praise and admiration of Rana Pratap 
of Mewar, who was continually fighting Akbar and never 
submitted to him. Khankhana admires and commends the patrio- 
tism and high sense of honour and chivalry of his enemy on the 
battlefield. 

It was this chivalrous and friendly approach on which Akbar 
based his policy and which many of his counsellors and ministers 
learned from him. He was particularly attached to the Rajputs, 
for he admired in them qualities which he himself possessed — 
reckless courage, a sense of honour and chivalry, and an adherence 
to the pledged word. He won over the Rajputs, but. the Rajputs 
for all their admirable qualities, represented a medieval type of 
society which was already becoming out of date as new forces 
were arising. Akbar was not conscious of these new forces, for he 
himself was a prisoner of his own social inheritance. 

269 



Akbar's success is astonishing, for he created a sense of one- 
ness among the diverse elements of north and central India. 
There was the barrier of a ruling class, mainly of foreign origin, 
and there were the barriers of religion and caste, a proselytizing 
religion opposed to the static but highly resistant system. These 
barriers did not disappear, but in spite of them that feeling of one- 
ness grew. It was not merely an attachment to his person; it was an 
attachment to the structure he had built. His son and grandson, 
Jehangir and Shah Jehan, accepted that structure and functioned 
within its framework They were men of no outstanding ability, but 
their reigns were successful because they continued on the lines so 
firmly laid down by Akbar. The next comer, Aurungzeb, much 
abler but of a different mould, swerved and left that beaten track, 
undoing Akbar's work. Yet not entirely, for it is extraordinary how, 
in spite of him and his feeble and pitiful successors, the feeling of 
reverence for that structure continued. That feeling was largely 
confined to the north and centre; it did not extend to the south 
or west. And it was from western India, therefore, that the chal- 
lenge to it came. 

Aurangzeb puts the Clock Back 
Growth of Hindu Nationalism. Shivaji 

Shah Jehan was a contemporary of Louis XIV of France, le Grand 
Monarque, and the Thirty Years War was then ravaging central 
Europe. As Versailles took shape, the Taj Mahal and the Pearl 
Mosque grew up in Agra, and the Jame Masjid of Delhi and the 
Diwan-i-Am and the Diwan-i-Khas in the imperial palace. These 
lovely buildings with a fairy-like beauty represent the height of 
Mughal splendour. The Delhi court, with its Peacock Throne, 
was more magnificent and luxurious than Versailles, but, like 
Versailles, it rested on a poverty-stricken and exploited people. 
There was a terrible famine in Gujarat and the Dekhan. 

Meanwhile the naval power of England was rising and spread- 
ing. The only Europeans that Akbar knew were the Portuguese. 
During his son Jehangir's time the British navy defeated the Portu- 
guese in Indian seas and Sir Thomas Roe, an ambassador of James 
I of England, presented himself at Jehangir's court in 1615. He 
succeeded in getting permission to start factories. The Surat factory 
was started, and Madras was founded in 1639. For over 100 years 
no one in India attached any importance to the British. The fact 
that the British now controlled the sea routes and had practically 
driven away the Portuguese had no significance for the Mughal 
rulers or their advisers. When the Mughal Empire was visibly 
weakening during Aurungzeb's reign, the British made an orga- 
nized attempt to increase their possessions in India by war. This 
was in 1685. Aurungzeb, weak as he was growing and beset by 

270 



enemies, succeeded in defeating the British. Even before this the 
French had established footholds in India. The overflowing energies 
of Europe were spreading out in India and the east just when 
India's political and economic condition was rapidly declining. 
In France, Louis XIV was still continuing his long reign, laying 
the seeds of future revolution. In England, the rising middle classes 
had cut off the head of their king, Cromwell's brief-lived republic 
had flourished, Charles II had come and gone, and James II had 
run away. Parliament, representing to a large extent a new mer- 
cantile class, had curbed the king and established its supremacy. 

It was during this period that Aurungzeb succeeded to the 
throne of the Mughals after a civil war, having imprisoned his 
own father, Shah Jehan. Only an Akbar might have understood 
the situation and controlled the new forces that were rising. 
Perhaps even he could have only postponed the dissolution ofhis 
empire unless his curiosity and thirst for knowledge led him to 
understand the significance of the new techniques that were 
arising, and of the shift in economic conditions that was taking 
place. Aurungzeb, far from understanding the present, failed 
even to appreciate the immediate past; he was a throw-back and, 
for all his ability and earnestness, he tried to undo what his 
predecessors had done. A bigot and an austere puritan, he was no 
lover of art or literature. He infuriated the great majority of his 
subjects by imposing the old hated jeziya poll-tax on the Hindus 
and destroying many of their temples. He offended the proud 
Rajputs who had been the props and pillars of the Mughal Empire. 
In the north he roused the Sikhs, who, from being a peaceful sect 
representing some kind of synthesis of Hindu and Islamic ideas, 
were converted by repression and persecution into a military 
brotherhood. Near the west coast of India, he angered the warlil-e 
Marathas, descendants of the ancient Rashtrakutas, just when a 
brilliant captain had risen amongst them. 

All over the widespread domains of the Mughal Empire there 
was a ferment and a growth of revivalist sentiment, which was 
a mixture of religion and nationalism. That nationalism was 
certainly not of the modern secular type, nor did it, as a rule, 
embrace the whole of India in its scope. It was coloured by feuda- 
lism, by local sentiment and sectarian feeling. The Rajputs, 
more feudal than the rest, thought of their clan loyalties; the Sikhs, 
a comparatively small group in the Punjab, were absorbed in their 
own self-defence and could hardly look beyond the Punjab. Yet the 
religion itself had a strong national background and all its tradi- 
tions were connected with India. 'The Indians,' writes Professor 
Macdonell, 'are the only division of the Indo-European family 
which has created a great national religion — Brahmanism — and 
a great world religion — Buddhism; while all the rest far from 
displaying originality in this sphere have long since adopted a foreign 

271 



faith.' That combination of religion and nationalism gained strength 
and cohesiveness from both elements, and yet its ultimate weakness 
and insufficiency were also derived from that mixture. For it could 
only be an exclusive and partial nationalism, not including the many 
elements in India that lay outside that religious sphere. Hindu 
nationalism was a natural growth from the soil of India, but inevi- 
tably it comes in the way of the larger nationalism which rises 
above differences of religion or creed. 

It is true that during this period of disruption, when a great 
empire was breaking up and many adventurers, Indian and 
foreign, were trying to carve out principalities for themselves, 
nationalism, in its present sense, was hardly in evidence at all. 
Each individual adventurer sought to augment his own power; 
each group fended for itself. Such history as we have only tells us 
of these adventurers, attaching more importance to them than to 
more significant happenings below the surface of events. Yet there 
are glimpses to show that it was not all adventurism, though many 
adventurers held the field. The Marathas, especially, had a wider 
conception and as they grew in power this conception also grew. 
Warren Hastings wrote in 1784: 'The Marathas possess, alone of 
all the people of Hindostan and Deccan, a principle of national 
attachment, which is strongly impressed on the minds of all indi- 
viduals of the nation, and would probably unite their chiefs, as in 
one common cause, if any great danger were to threaten the gene- 
ral state.' Probably this national sentiment of their was largely 
confined to the Marathi-speaking area. Nevertheless the Marathas 
were catholic in their political and military system as well as their 
habits, and there was a certain internal democracy among them. 
All this gave strength to them. Shivaji, though he fought Aurung- 
zeb, freely employed Moslems. 

An equally important factor in the break-up of the Mughal 
Empire was the cracking up of the economic structure. There 
were repeated peasant risings, some of them on a big scale. From 
1669 onwards the Jat peasantry, not far fram the capital itself, rose 
again and again against the Delhi Government. Yet another 
revolt of poor people was that of the Satnamis who were described 
by a Mughal noble as 'a gang of bloody miserable rebels, gold- 
smiths, carpenters, sweepers, tanners, and other ignoble beings.' 
Thus far revolts had been confined to princes and nobles and others 
of high degree. Quite another class was now experimenting with 
them. 

While the empire was rent by strife and revolt, the new Mara- 
tha power was growing and consolidating itself in western India. 
Shivaji, born in 1627, was the ideal guerilla leader of hardened 
mountaineers and his cavalry went far and wide, sacking the city 
of Surat, where the English had their factory, and enforcing the 
chowth tax payment over distant parts of the Mughal dominions. 

272 



Shivaji was the symbol of a resurgent Hindu nationalism, drawing 
inspiration from the old classics, courageous, and possessing high qua- 
lities of leadership. He built up the Marathas as a strong unified 
fighting group, gave them a nationalist background, and made 
them a formidable power which broke up the Mughal Empire. 
He died in 1680, but the Maratha power continued to grow till it 
dominated India. 

The Marathas and the British Struggle for 
Supremacy. Triumph of the British 

The 100 years that followed the death of Aurungzeb in 1707 saw 
a complicated and many-sided struggle for mastery over India. 
The Mughal Empire rapidly fell to pieces and the imperial vice- 
roys and governors began to function as semi-independent rulers, 
though so great was the prestige of the descendant of the Mughals 
in Delhi that a formal allegiance was paid to him even when he 
was powerless and a prisoner of others. These satrapies had no real 
power or importance, except in so far as they helped or hindered the 
main protagonists for power. The Nizam of Hydrabad, by virtue 
of the strategic position of his state in the south, appeared to have 
a certain importance in the beginning. But it soon transpired that 
this importance was entirely fictitious and the state was 'straw- 
stuffed and held upright' by external forces. It showed a peculiar 
capacity for duplicity and for profiting by the misfortunes of others 
while avoiding all risk and dangers. Sir John Shore described 
it as 'incorrigibly depraved, devoid of energy., .consequently liable 
to sink into vassalage.' The Marathas looked upon the Nizam as 
one of their subordinate chieftains paying tribute to them. An 
attempt by him to avoid this and to show independence met with 
swift retribution and the Marathas put to flight his feeble and 
none-too-brave army. He took refuge under the protecting wings 
of the growing power of the British East India Company and sur- 
vived as a state because of this vassalage. Indeed the Hyderabad 
state enlarged its area considerably, without any remarkable 
effort on its part, by the British victory over Tipu Sultan of Mysore. 
Warren Hastings, writing in 1784, refers to the Nizam of Hydera- 
bad : 'His dominions are of small extent and scanty revenue; his 
military strength is represented to be most contemptible; nor 
was he at any period of his life distinguished for personal courage 
or the spirit of enterprise. On the contrary, it seems to have been 
his constant and ruling maxim to foment the incentives of war 
among his neighbours, to profit by their weakness and embar- 
rassments, but to avoid being a party himself in any of their 
contests, and to submit even to humiliating sacrifices rather than 
subject himself to the chances of war.'* 

'Quoted in Edward Thompson's 'The Making of the Indian Princes' (1943),p. 1. 

273 



The real protagonists for power in India during the eighteenth 
century were four: two of these were Indian and two foreign. 
The Indians were the Marathas and Haidar Ali and his son 
Tipu Sultan in the south; the foreigners were the British and the 
French. Of these, it appeared almost inevitable, during the first 
half of the century, that the Marathas were destined to establish 
their supremacy over India as a whole and to be the successors 
of the Mughal Empire. Their troops appeared at the very gates 
of Delhi as early as 1737 and there was no power strong enough 
to oppose them. 

Just then (in 1739) a new eruption took place in the north- 
west and Nadir Shah of Persia swept down to Delhi, killing and 
plundering, and carrying off enormous treasure including the 
famous Peacock Throne. It was an easy raid for him for the 
Delhi rulers were effete and effeminate, wholly unused to war- 
fare, and Nadir Shah did not come into conflict with the Marathas. 
In a sense, his raid facilitated matters for the Marathas, who in 
subsequent years spread to the Punjab. Again Maratha supremacy 
of India was in sight. 

Nadir Shah's raid had two consequences. He put an end com- 
pletely to any pretensions that the Delhi Mughal rulers had to 
power and dominion; heneceforth they became vague shadows 
enjoying a ghostl/ sovereignty, puppets in the hands of any one 
who was strong enough to hold them. To a large extent 
they had arrived at that stage even before Nadir Shah came; 
he completed the process. And yet, so strong is the hold of tradi- 
tion and long-established custom, the British East India Company 
as well as others, continued to send humble presents to them in 
token of tribute right up to the eve of Plassey; and even after- 
wards for a long time the Company considered itself and func- 
tioned as the agent of the Delhi emperor, in whose name money 
was coined till 1835. 

The second consequence of Nadir Shah's raid was the sepa- 
ration of Afghanistan from India. Afghanistan, which for long 
ages past had been part of India, was now cut off and became 
part of Nadir Shah's dominions. Sometime afterwards a local 
rebellion resulted in the murder of Nadir Shah by a group of 
his own officers and Afghanistan became an independent state. 

The Marathas had in no way been weakened by Nadir Shah 
and they continued to spread in the Punjab. But in 1761 they 
met with a crushing defeat at Panipat from an Afghan invader, 
Ahmad Shah Durrani, who was ruling Afghanistan then. The 
flower of the Maratha forces perished in this disaster and, for 
a while, their dreams of empire faded away. They recovered 
gradually and the Maratha dominions were divided into a num- 
ber of independent states joined together in a confederacy under 
the leadership of the Peshwa at Poona. The chiefs of the bigger 

274 



states were Scindhia of Gwalior, Holkar of Indore, and the 
Gaekwar of Baroda. This confederacy still dominated a vast 
area in western and central India. But the Panipat defeat of the 
Marathas by Ahmad Shah had weakened them just when the 
English Company was emerging as an important territorial 
power of India. 

In Bengal, Clive, by promoting treason and forgery and with 
very little fighting, had won the battle of Plassey in 1757, a date 
which is sometimes said to mark the beginning of the British 
Empire in India. It was an unsavoury beginning and something 
of that bitter taste has clung to it ever since. Soon the British 
held the whole of Bengal and Bihar and one of the early conse- 
quences of their rule was a terrible famine which ravaged these 
two provinces in 1770, killing ever a third of the population of 
this rich, vast, and densely populated area. 

In south India, the struggle between the English and the French, 
a part of the world struggle between the two, ended in the triumph 
of the English, and the French were almost eliminated from 
India. 

With the elimination of the French power from India, three 
contestants for supremacy remained — the Maratha confederacy, 
Haider Ali in the south, and the British. In spite of their victory 
at Plasssey and their spreading out over Bengal and Bihar, few, 
if any, people in India then looked upon the British as a dominant 
power, destined to rule over the whole of India. An observer 
would still have given the first place to the Marathas who sprawled 
all over western and central India right up to Delhi and whose 
courage and fighting qualities were well-known. Haider Ali and 
Tipu Sultan were formidable adversaries who inflicted a severe 
defeat on the British and came near to breaking the power of the 
East India Company. But they were confined to the south and did 
not directly affect the fortunes of India as a whole. Haider Ali 
was a remarkable man and one of the notable figures in Indian 
history. He had some kind of a national ideal and possessed the 
qualities of a leader with vision. Continually suffering from a 
painful disease, his self-discipline and capacity for hard work were 
astonishing. He realized, long before others did so, the importance 
of sea power and the growing menace of the British based on 
naval strength. He tried to organize a joint effort to drive them 
out and, for this purpose, sent envoys to the Marathas, the Nizam, 
and Shuja-ud-Dowla ofOudh. But nothing came of this. He started 
building his own navy and, capturing the Maldive Islands, made 
them his headquarters for shipbuilding and naval activities. He 
died by the wayside as he was marching with his army. His son 
Tipu continued to strengthen his navy. Tipu also sent messages to 
Napoleon and to the Sultan in Constantinople. 

In the north a Sikh state under Ranjit Singh was growing up 

275 



in the Punjab, to spread later to Kashmir and the North West 
Frontier Province; but that too was a marginal state not affect- 
ing the real struggle for supremacy. This struggle, it became 
clear as the eighteenth century approached its end, lay between 
the only two powers that counted — the Marathas and the British. 
All the other states and principalities were subordinate and 
subsidiary to these two. 

Tipu Sultan of Mysore was finally defeated by the British in 
1799, and that left the field clear for the final contest between 
the Marathas and the British East India Company. Charles 
Metcalfe, one of the ablest of the British Officials in India, wrote 
in 1806: 'India contains no more than two great powers, British 
and Mahratta, and every other state acknowledges the influence 
of one or the other. Every inch that we recede will be occupied 
by them.' But there was rivalry amongst the Maratha chieftains, 
and they fought and were defeated separately by the British. They 
won some notable victories and especially inflicted a severe defeat 
on the British near Agra in 1804, but by 1818 the Maratha power 
was finally crushed and the great chiefs that represented it in 
central India submitted and accepted the overlordship of the East 
India Company. The British became then the unchallenged sove- 
reigns of a great part of India, governing the country directly 
or through puppet and subsidiary princes. The Punjab and some 
outlying parts were still beyond their control, but the British 
Empire in India had become an established fact, and subsequent 
wars with the Sikhs and Gurkhas and in Burma merely rounded 
it off on the map. 

The Backwardness of India and the Superiority of the 
English in Organization and Technique 

Looking back over this period, it almost seems that the British 
succeeded in dominating India by a succession of fortuitous 
circumstances and lucky flukes. With remarkably little effort, 
considering the glittering prize, they won a great empire and 
enormous wealth, which helped to make them the leading power 
in the world. It seems easy for a slight turn in events to have 
taken place which would have dashed their hopes and ended 
their ambitions. They were defeated on many occasions — by 
Haider Ali and Tipu, by the Marathas, by the Sikhs, and by 
the Gurkhas. A little less good fortune and they might have lost 
their foothold in India, or at the most held on to certain coastal 
territories only. 

And yet a closer scrutiny reveals, in the circumstances then 
existing, a certain inevitability in what happened. Good fortune 
there certainly was, but there must be an ability to profit by good 
fortune. India was then in a fluid and disorganized state, follow- 

276 



ing the break-up of the Mughal Empire; for many centuries it 
had not been so weak and helpless. Organized power having 
broken down, the field was left open to adventurers and new 
claimants for dominion. Among these adventurers and claimants, 
the British, and the British alone at the time, possessed many of 
the qualities necessary for success. Their major disadvantage was 
that they were foreigners coming from a far country. Yet that 
very disadvantage worked in their favour, for no one took them 
very seriously or considered them as possible contestants for the 
sovereignty of India. It is extraordinary how this delusion lasted 
till long after Plassey, and their functioning in formal matters as 
the agents of the shadow Emperor at Delhi helped to further this 
false impression. The plunder that they carried away from Bengal 
and their peculiar methods of trade led to the belief that these 
foreigners were out for money and treasure and not so much for 
dominion; that they were a temporary though painful infliction, 
rather like Timur or Nadir Shah, who came and plundered and 
went back to his homeland. 

The East India Company had originally established itself for 
trading purposes, and its military establishment was meant to 
protect this trade. Gradually, and almost unnoticed by others, 
it had extended the territory under its control, chiefly by taking 
sides in local disputes, helping one rival against another. The 
company's troops were better trained and were an asset to any 
side, and the company extracted heavy payment for the help. 
So the company's power grew and its military establishment 
increased. People looked upon these troops as mercenaries to 
be hired. When it was realized that the British were playing 
nobody's game but their own, and were out for the political domi- 
nation of India, they had already established themselves firmly 
in the country. 

Anti-foreign sentiment there undoubtedly was, and this grew 
in later years; but it was far removed from any general or wide- 
spread national feeling. The background was feudal and loyalty 
went to the local chief. Widespread distress, as in China during 
the days of the war lords, compelled people to join any military 
leader who offered regular pay or opportunities of loot. The 
East India Company's armies largely consisted of Indian sepoys. 
Only the Marathas had some national sentiment, something much 
more than loyalty to a leader, behind them, but even this was 
narrow and limited. They managed to irritate the brave Rajputs 
by their treatment of them. Instead of gaining them as allies, they 
had to deal with them as opponents or as grumbling and dissatis- 
fied feudatories. Among the Maratha chiefs themselves there was 
bitter rivalry, and occasionally civil war, in spite of a vague 
alliance under the Peshwa's leadership. At critical moments they 
failed to support each other, and were separately defeated. 

277 



Yet the Marathas produced a number of very able men, states- 
men and warriors, among them being Nana Farnavis, the Peshwa 
Baji Rao I, Mahadaji Scindhia of Gwalior, and Yaswant Rao 
Holkar of Indore, as also that remarkable woman, Princess Ahalya 
Bai of Indore. Their rank and file was good, seldom deserting 
a post and often facing certain death unmoved; but behind all 
this courage there was often an adventurism and amateurishness, 
both in peace and war, which were surprising. Their ignorance of 
the world was appalling, and even their knowledge of India's 
geography was strictly limited. What is worse, they did not take 
the trouble to find out what was happening elsewhere and what 
their enemies were doing. There could be no far-sighted states- 
manship or effective strategy with these limitations. Their speed 
of movement and mobility often surprised and unnerved the 
enemy, but essentially war was looked upon as a series of gallant 
charges and little more. They were ideal guerrilla fighters. Later 
they reorganized their armies on more orthodox lines, with the result 
that what they gained in armour they lost in speed and mobility, 
and they could not adjust themselves easily to these new condi- 
tions. They considered themselves clever, and so they were, but 
it was not difficult to overreach them in peace or war, for their 
thought was imprisoned in an old and out-of-date framework and 
could not go beyond it. 

The superiority in discipline and technique of foreign-trained 
armies had, of course, been noticed at an early stage by Indian 
rulers. They employed French and English officers to train their 
own armies, and the rivalry between these two helped to build 
up Indian armies. Haider Ali and Tipu also had some concep- 
tion of the importance of sea-power, and they tried, unsuccess- 
fully and too late, to build up a fleet in order to challenge the 
British at sea. The Marathas also made a feeble attempt in this 
direction. India was then a shipbuilding country, but it was not 
easy to build up a navy within a short time and in the face of 
constant opposition. With the elimination of the French many 
of their officers in the armies of the Indian powers had to go. 
The foreign officers who remained, chiefly British, often deserted 
their employers at critical stages, and, on some occasions, betray- 
ed them, surrendering and marching over to their enemies (the 
British) with their armies and treasure. This reliance on foreign 
officers not only indicates the backwardness of the army organiza- 
tion ofthe Indian powers, but was also a constant source of danger 
owing to their unreliability. The British often had a powerful 
fifth column both in the administration and in the armies of the 
Indian rulers. 

If the Marathas, with their homogeneity and group patrio- 
tism, were backward in civil and military organization, much 
more so were the other Indian powers. The Rajputs, for all their 

278 



courage, functioned in the old feudal way, romantic but thoroughly 

inefficient, and were rent among themselves by tribal feuds. Many 
of them, from a sense of feudal loyalty to an overlord, and partly 
as a consequence of Akbar's policy in the past, sided with the 
vanishing power of Delhi. But Delhi was too feeble to profit by this, 
and the Rajputs deteriorated and became the playthings of others, 
ultimately falling into the orbit of Scindhia, the Maratha. Some 
of their chiefs tried to play a careful balancing game in order to 
save themselves. The various Moslem rulers and chiefs in northern 
and central India were as feudal and backward in their ideas as 
the Rajput. They made no real difference, except to add to the 
confusion and the misery of the mass of the people. Some of them 
acknowledged the suzerainty of the Marathas. 

The Gurkhas of Nepal were splendid and disciplined soldiers, 
the equals, if not the superiors, of any troops that the East India 
Company could produce. Although completely feudal in orga- 
nization, their attachment to their homelands was great, and 
this sentiment made them formidable fighters in its defence. They 
gave a fright to the British, but made no difference to the issue 
of the main struggle in India. 

The Marathas did not consolidate themselves in the vast areas 
in northern and central India where they had spread. They came 
and went, taking no root. Perhaps nobody could take root just 
then owing to the alternating fortunes of war, and indeed many 
territories under British control, or acknowledging British suzera- 
inty were in a far worse condition, and the British or their admi- 
nistration had not taken root there. 

If the Marathas (and much more so the other Indian powers) 
were amateurish and adventurist in their methods, the British in 
India were thoroughly professional. Many of the British leaders 
were adventurous enough but they' were in no way adventurist 
in the policy for which they all worked in their separate spheres. 
'The East India Company's secretariat,' writes Edward Thomp- 
son, 'was served in the courts of native- India by a succession 
and galaxy of men such as even the British Empire has hardly 
ever possessed together at any other time.' One of the chief duties 
of the British residents at these courts was to bribe and corrupt 
the ministers and other officials. Their spy system was perfect, says 
a historian. They had complete information of the courts and 
armies of their adversaries, while those adversaries lived in 
ignorance of what the British were doing or were going to do. 
The fifth column of the British functioned continuously and in 
moments of crisis and in the heat of war there would be defections 
in their favour which made a great difference. They won most 
of their batles before the actual fighting took place. That had been 
so at Plassey and was repeated again and again right up to the 
Sikh wars. A notable instance of desertion was that of a high officer 

279 



in the service of Scindhia of Gwalior, who had secretly come to 
terms with the British and went over to them with his entire army 
at the moment of battle. He was awarded for this later by being 
made the ruler of a new Indian state carved out of the territories 
of Scindhia whom he had betrayed. That state still exists, but 
the man's name became a byword for treason and treachery, just 
as Quisling's in recent years. 

The British thus represented a higher political and military 
organization, well knit together and having very able leaders. 
They were far better informed than their adversaries and they 
took full advantage of the disunity and rivalries of the Indian 
powers. Their command of the seas gave them safe bases and 
opportunities to add to their resources. Even when temporarily 
defeated, they could recuperate and assume the offensive again. 
Their possession of Bengal after Plassey gave them enormous 
wealth and resources to carry on their warfare with the Marathas 
and others, and each fresh conquest added to these resources. 
For the Indian powers defeat often meant a disaster which could 
not be remedied. 

This period of war and conquest and plunder converted cen- 
tral India and Rajputana and some parts of the south and west 
into derelict areas full of violence and unhappiness and misery. 
Armies marched across them and in their train came highway 
robbers, and no one cared for the miserable human beings who 
lived there, except to despoil them of their money and goods. 
Parts of India became rather like central Europe during the 
Thirty Years War. Conditions were bad almost everywhere but 
they were worst of all in the areas under British control or suzera- 
inty: '...nothing could be more fantastic than the picture pre- 
sented by Madras or by the vassal states of Oudh and Hyderabad, 
a seething delirium of misery. In comparison, the regions where 
the Nana (Farnavis, the Maratha statesman) governed were an 
oasis of gentle security' — so writes Edward Thomspson. 

Just prior to this period, large parts of India were singularly 
free from disorder, in spite of the disruption of the Mughal 
Empire. In Bengal during the long reign of Allawardi, the semi- 
independent Mughal Viceroy, peaceful and orderly government 
prevailed and trade and business flourished, adding to the great 
wealth of the province. Some little time after Allawardi's death 
the battle of Plassey (1757) took place and the East India Com- 
pany constituted themselves the agents of the Delhi Emperor, 
though in reality they were completely independent and could 
do what they willed. Then began the pillage of Bengal on behalf 
of the company and their agents and factors. Some years after 
Plassey began the reign of Ahalya Bai, of Indore in central India, 
and it lasted for thiry years (1765-1795). This has become almost 
legendary as a period during which perfect order and good govern- 

280 



merit prevailed and the people prospered. She was a very able 
ruler and organizer, highly respected during her lifetime, and 
considered as a saint by a grateful people after her death. Thus 
during the very period when Bengal and Bihar, under the new 
rule of the East India Company, deteriorated and there was 
organized plunder and political and economic chaos, leading 
.to terrible famines, central India as well as many other parts of the 
country were in a prosperous condition. 

The British had power and wealth but felt no responsibility 
for good government or any government. The merchants of the 
East India Company were interested in dividends and treasure and 
not in the improvement or even protection of those who had come 
under their sway. In particular, in the vassal states there was a 
perfect divorce between power and responsibility. 

When the British had finished with the Marathas and were 
secure in their conquests, they turned their minds towards civil 
government and some kind of order was evolved. In the subsi- 
diary states, however, the change was very slow, for in those 
so-called protected areas there was a permanent divorce between 
responsibility and power. 

We are often reminded, lest we forget, that the British rescued 
India from chaos and anarchy. That is true in so far as they esta- 
blished orderly government after this period, which the Marathas 
have called 'the time of terror.' But that chaos and anarchy were 
partly at least due to the policy of the East India Company and 
their representatives in India. It is also conceivable that even 
without the good offices of the British, so eagerly given, peace and 
orderly government might have been established in India after 
the conclusion of the struggle for supremacy. Such developments 
had been known to have taken place in India, as in other countries, 
in the course of her 5,000 years of history. 

Ranjit Singh and Jai Singh 

It seems clear that India became a prey to foreign conquest 
because of the inadequacy of her own people and because the 
British represented a higher and advancing social order. The 
contrast between the leaders on both sides is marked; the Indians, 
for all their ability, functioned in a narrow, limited sphere of thought 
and action, unaware of what was happening elsewhere and there- 
fore unable to adapt themselves to changing conditions. Even 
if the curiosity of individuals was roused they could not break the 
shell which held them and their people prisoners. The English- 
men, on the other hand, were much more worldly wise, shaken up 
and forced to think by events in their own country and in France 
and America. Two great revolutions had taken place. The 
campaigns of the French revolutionary armies and of Napoleon 

281 



had changed the whole science of war. Even the most ignorant 
Englishman who came to India saw different parts of the world 
in the course of his journey. In England itself great discoveries 
were being made, heralding the industrial revolution, though 
perhaps few ralised their far-reaching significance at the time. 
But the leaven of change was working powerfully and influencing 
the people. Behind it all was the expansive energy which sent the 
British to distant lands. 

Those who had recorded the history of India are so full of wars 
and tumults and the political and military leaders of the day, 
that they tell us very little of what was happening in the mind of 
India and how social and economic processes were at work. Only 
occasional and accidental glimpses emerge from this sordid record. 
It appears that during this period of terror the people generally 
were crushed and exhausted, passively submitting to the decrees 
of a malevolent fate, dazed and devoid of curiosity. There must 
have been many individuals, however, who were curious and who 
tried to understand the new forces at play, but they were over- 
whelmed by the tide of events and could not influence them. 

One of the individuals who was full of curiosity was Maharaja 
Ranjit Singh, a Jat Sikh, who had built up a kingdom in the 
Punjab, which subsequently spread to Kashmir and the Frontier 
Province. He had failings and vices; nevertheless he was a re- 
markable man. The Frenchman, Jacquemont, calls him 'extre- 
mely brave' and 'almost the first inquisitive Indian I have seen, 
but his curiosity makes up for the apathy of the whole nation.' 
'His conversation is like a nightmare.'* It must be remembered 
that Indians as a rule, are a reserved people, and more so the 
intellectuals amongst them. Very few of these would have cared 
to associate then with the foreign military leaders and adventurers 
in India, many of whose actions filled them with horror. So these 
intellectuals tried to preserve their dignity by keeping as far as 
possible from the foreign elements and met them only on formal 
occasions when circumstances compelled them to do so. The 
Indians whom Englishmen and other foreigners usually met were 
of the opportunist and servile class that surrounded them or the 
ministers, frequently corrupt and intriguing, of the Indian courts. 

Ranjit Singh was not only intellectually curious and inquisi- 
tive, he was remarkably humane at a time when India and the 
world seethed with callousness and inhumanity. He built up a 
kingdom and a powerful army and yet he disliked bloodshed. 
'Never was so large an empire founded by one man with so little 
criminality,' says Prinsep. He abolished the death sentence for 
every crime, however heinous it might be, when in England 
even petty pilferers had to face death. 'Except in actual war- 
fare,' writes Osborne, who visited him, 'he has never been known 

*Qyoted by Edward Thompson in ' The Making of Indian Princes' (1943), p. 158. 
282 



to take life, though his own has been attempted more than once, 
and his reign will be found freer from any striking acts of cruelty 
and oppression than those of many more civilized monarches.'* 

Another but a different type of Indian statesman was Sawai 
Jai Singh, of Jaipur in Rajputana. He belongs to a somewhat 
earlier period and he died in 1743. He lived during the period 
of disruption following Aurungzeb's death. He was clever and 
opportunist enough to survive the .many shocks and changes 
that followed each other in quick succession. He acknowledged 
the suzerainty of the Delhi Emperor. When he found that the 
advancing Marathas were too strong to be checked, he came to 
terms with them on behalf of the emperor. But it is not his poli- 
tical or military career that interests me. He was a brave warrior 
and an accomplished diplomat, but he was something much more 
than this. He was a mathematician and an astronomer, a scientist 
and a town-planner, and he was interested in the study of history. 

Jai Singh built big observatories at Jaipur, Delhi, Ujjain, 
Benares, and Mathura. Learning through Portuguese mission- 
aries of the progress of astronomy in Portugal, he sent his own 
men, with one of the missionaries, to the court of the Portuguese 
King Emmanuel. Emmanuel sent his envoy, Xavier de Silva, 
with De la Hire's tables to Jai Singh. On comparing these with 
his own tables, Jai Singh came to the conclusion that the Portu- 
guese tables were less exact and had several errors. He attributed 
these to the 'inferior diameters' of the instruments used. 

Jai Singh was of course fully acquainted with Indian mathe- 
matics; he had studied the old Greek treatises and also knew of 
recent European developments in mathematics. He had some 
of the Greek books (Euclid, etc.) as well as European works on 
plane and spherical trigonometry and the construction and use 
of logarithms translated into Sanskrit. He also had Arabic books 
on astronomy translated. 

He founded the city of Jaipur. Interested in town planning, 
he collected the plans of many European cities of the time and 
then drew up his own plan. Many of these plans of the old Euro- 
pean cities of the time are preserved in the Jaipur museum. The 
city of Jaipur was so well and wisely planned that it is still consi- 
dered a model of town-planning. 

Jai Singh did all this and much more in the course of a compa- 
ratively brief life and in the midst of perpetual wars and court 
intrigues, on which he was himself often involved. Nadir Shah's 
invasion took place just four years before Jai Singh's death. Jai 
Singh would have been a remarkable man anywhere and at any 
time. The fact that he rose and functioned as a scientist in the 
typically feudal milieu of Rajputana and during one of the darkest 

* Quotations taken from Edward Thompson: 'The Making of Indian Princes' (1943), 
pp. 157, 158. 

283 



periods of Indian history, when disruption and war and tumults 
filled the scene, is very significant. It shows that the spirit of 
scientific inquiry was not dead in India and that there was some 
ferment at work which might have yielded rich results if only an 
opportunity had been given to it to fructify. Jai Singh was no 
anachronism or solitary thinker in an unfriendly and uncom- 
prehending environment. He was a product of his age and he 
collected a number of scientific workers to work with him. Out 
of these he sent some in the embassy to Portugal, and social custom 
or taboo did not deter him from doing so. It seems probable that 
there was plenty of good material for scientific work in the country, 
both theoretical and technical, if only it was given a chance to 
function. That opportunity did not come for a long time. Even 
when the troubles and disorders were over, there was no encourage- 
ment of scientific work by those in authority. 

The Economic Background of India: the two Englands 

What was the economic background of India when all these 
far-reaching political changes were taking place? V. Anstey has 
written that right up to the eighteenth century, 'Indian methods 
of production and of industrial and commerical organization 
could stand comparison with those in vogue in any other part of 
the world.' India was a highly developed manufacturing country 
exporting her manufactured products to Europe and other coun- 
tries. Her banking system was efficient and well organized 
throughout the country, and the hundis or bills of exchange issued 
by the great business or financial houses were honoured every- 
where in India, as well as in Iran, and Kabul and Herat and 
Tashkent and other places in central Asia. Merchant capital 
had emerged and there was an elaborate network of agents, 
jobbers, brokers, and middlemen. The ship building industry 
was flourishing and one of the flagships of an English admiral 
during the Napoleonic wars had been built by an Indian firm 
in India. India was, in fact, as advanced industrially, commer- 
cially, and financially as any country prior to the industrial revo- 
lution. No such development could have taken place unless the 
country had enjoyed long periods of stable and peaceful govern- 
ment and the highways were safe for traffic and trade. 

Foreign adventurers originally came to India because of the 
excellence of her manufacturers which had a big market in. 
Europe. The chief business of the British East India Company 
in its early days was to trade with Indian goods in Europe, and 
very profitable trading it was, yielding enormous dividends. So 
efficient and highly organized were Indian methods of produc- 
tion, and such was the skill of India's artisans and craftsmen, 
that they could compete successfully even with the higher tech- 

284 



niques of production which were being established in England. 
When the big machine age began in England, Indian goods 
continued to pour in and had to be stopped by very heavy duties 
and, in some cases, by outright prohibitions. 

Clive described Murshidabad, in Bengal, in 1757, the very 
year of Plassey, as a city 'as extensive, populous, and rich as the 
city of London, with the difference that there are individuals 
in the first possessing infinitely greater property than in the last.' 
The city of Dacca, in eastern Bengal, was famous for its fine 
muslins. These two cities, important as they were, were near the 
periphery of Hindustan. All over the vast land there were greater 
cities and large numbers of big manufacturing and trading centres, 
and a very rapid and ingenious system of communicating news 
and market prices had been evolved. The great business houses 
often received news, even of the wars that were going on, long 
before despatches reached the officials of the East India Company. 
The economy of India had thus advanced to as high a stage as it 
could reach prior to the industrial revolution. Whether it had 
the seeds of further progress in it or was too much bound up with 
the rigid social structure, it is difficult to say. It seems quite pos- 
sible, however, that under normal conditions it would have under- 
gone that change and begun to adapt itself, in its own way, to 
the new industrial conditions. And yet, though it was ripe for 
a change, that change itself required a revolution within its own 
framework. Perhaps some catalytic agent was necessary to bring 
about that change. It is clear that however highly organized and 
developed its pre-industrial economy was, it could not compete 
for long with the products of industrialized countries. It had to 
industrialize itself or submit to foreign economic penetration 
which would have led to political interference. As it happened, 
foreign political domination came first and this led to a rapid 
destruction of the economy India had built up, without anything 
positive or constructive taking its place. The East India Company 
represented both British political power and British vested inte- 
rests and economic power. It was supreme and, being a company of 
merchants, it was intent on making money. Just when it was making 
money with amazing rapidity and in fantastic quantities, Adam 
Smith wrote about it in 'The Wealth of Nations' in 1776: 'The 
government of an exclusive company of marchants is perhaps 
the worst of all governments for any country whatever.' 

Though the Indian merchant and manufacturing classes were 
rich and spread out all over the country, and even controlled 
the economic structure, they had no political power. Government 
was despotic and still largely feudal. In fact, it was probably more 
feudal than it had been at some previous stages of Indian history. 
Hence there was no middle class strong enough, or even consci- 
ously thinking of seizing power, as in some western countries. 

285 



The people generally had grown apathetic and servile. There was 
thus a gap which had to be filled before any revolutionary change 
could take place. Perhaps this gap had been produced by the 
static nature of Indian society which refused to change in a chang- 
ing world, for every civilization which resists change declines. 
That society, as constituted, had no more creative part to play. 
A change was overdue. 

The British, at that time, were politically much more advanced. 
They had had their political revolution and had established the 
power of Parliament over that of the King. Their middle classes, 
conscious of their new power, were full of the impulse to expand. 
That vitality and energy, proof of a growing and progressive 
society, were indeed very evident in England. They showed them- 
selves in many ways and most of all in the inventions and discoveries 
which heralded the industrial revolution. 

And yet, what was the British ruling class then? Charles and 
Mary Beard, the eminent American historians, tell us how the 
success of the American revolution removed suddenly from the 
royal provinces in America the 'British ruling class — a class 
accustomed to a barbarous criminal code, a narrow and intolerant 
university system, a government conceived as a huge aggregation 
of jobs and privileges, a contempt of men and women who toiled 
in field and shop, a denial of education to the masses, an established 
religion forced alike on Dissenters and Catholics, a dominion of 
squire and parson in counties and villages, callous brutality in 
army and navy, a scheme of primogeniture buttressing the rule 
of the landed gentry, a swarm of hungry placemen offering syco- 
phancy to the king in exchange for offices, sinecures, and pensions, 
and a constitution of church and state so ordered as to fasten upon 
the masses this immense pile of pride and plunder. From the 
weight of this mountain the American revolutionists delivered 
the colonial subjects of the British Crown. Within a decade or two 
after that emancipation they accomplished reforms in law and 
policy which required 100 years or more of persistent agitation 
to effect in the mother country — reforms which gave to the states- 
men who led in the agitation their title to immortality in English 
history'.* 

The American Declaration of Independence, that landmark 
in freedom's history, was signed in 1776, and six years later the 
colonies separated from England and began their real intellectual, 
economic, and social revolution. The land system, that had grown 
up under British inspiration and after the model of England, was 
completely transformed. Many privileges were abolished and the 
large estates confiscated and then distributed in small lots. A 
stirring period of awakening and intellectual and economic activity 
followed. Free America, rid of feudal relics and foreign control, 

•'The Rise of American Civilization' (1928), Volume I, p. 292. 
286 



marched ahead with giant strides. 

In France, the great revolution smashed the Bastille, symbol 
of the old order, and swept away the king and feudalism and 
declared the rights of man to the world. 

And in England then? Frightened by these revolutionary 
changes in America and France, England became even more 
reactionary, and her fierce and barbarous penal code became 
even more savage. When George III came to the English throne 
in 1760 there were about 160 offences for which men, women, 
and children were put to death. By the time his long reign ended 
in 1820, nearly a hundred new offences, carrying the death penalty, 
were added to this terrible list. The ordinary soldier in the British 
army was treated worse than a beast of the field, with a brutality 
and inhumanity that horrify. Death sentences were common and 
commoner still was flogging, inflicted in public, flogging up to 
several hundred lashes, till death sometimes intervened or the 
mangled body of the sufferer, just surviving, told the story to his 
dying day. 

In this matter as in many others involving humanity and 
respect for the individual and the group, India was far more 
advanced and had a higher civilization. There was more literacy 
in India then than in England or the rest of Europe, though the 
education was strictly traditional. Probably there were more civic 
amenities also. The general condition of the masses in Europe 
was very backward and deplorable and compared unfavourably 
with the conditions prevailing in India. But there was this vital 
difference: new forces and living currents were working invisibly 
in western Europe, bringing changes in their train; in India, 
conditions were far more static. 

England came to India. When Queen Elizabeth gave a charter 
to the East India Company in 1600, Shakespeare was alive and 
writing. In 1611 the Authorized English edition of the Bible was 
issued; in 1608 Milton was born. There followed Hampden and 
Cromwell and the political revolution. In 1660 the Royal Society 
of England, which was to advance the cause of science so much, 
was organized. A hundred years later, in 1760, the flying shuttle 
was invented, and there followed in quick succession the spinning 
jenny, the steam engine, and the power loom. 

Which of these two Englands came to India? The England of 
Shakespeare and Milton, of noble speech and writing and brave 
deed, of political revolution and the struggle for freedom, of science 
and technical progress, or the England of the savage penal code 
and brutal behaviour, of entrenched feudalism and reaction? 
For there were two Englands, just as in every country there are 
these two aspects of national character and civilization. 'The 
discrepancy in England,' write Edward Thompson, 'between the 
highest and the ordinary levels of our civilization, has always been 

287 



immense; I doubt if there is anything like it in any country with 
which we should wish to be compared and it is a discrepancy 
that lessens so slowly that it often seems hardly to lessen at all.'* 

The two Englands live side by side, influencing each other, 
and cannot be separated; nor could one of them come to India 
forgetting completely the other. Yet in every major action one 
plays the leading role, dominating the other, and it was inevit- 
able that the wrong England should play that role in India and 
should come in contact with and encourage the wrong India in 
the process. 

The independence of the United States of America is more or 
less contemporaneous with the loss of freedom by India. Survey- 
ing the past century and a half, an Indian looks somewhat wistfully 
and longingly at the vast progress made by the United States 
during this period, and compares it with what has been done and 
what has not been done in his own country. It is true no doubt 
that the Americans have many virtues and we have many failings, 
that America offered a virgin field and an almost clean slate to 
write upon while we were cluttered up with ancient memories 
and traditions. And yet perhaps it is not inconceivable that if 
Britain had not undertaken this great burden in India and, as she 
tells us, endeavoured for so long to teach us the difficult art of 
self-government, of which we had been so ignorant, India might 
not only have been freer and more prosperous, but also far more 
advanced in science and art and all that makes life worth living. 



''Making of Indian Princes' (1903), p. 264. 
288 



CHAPTER SEVEN 

THE LAST PHASE (1) 

Consolidation of British Rule and 
Rise of Nationalist Movement 

The Ideology of Empire. The New Caste 

'OUR WRITING OF INDIA'S HISTORY IS PERHAPS RESENTED MORE THAN 

anything else we have done' — so writes an Englishman well 
acquainted with India and her history. It is difficult to say what 
Indians have resented most in the record of British rule in India; 
the list is long and varied. But it is true that British accounts of 
India's history, more especially of what is called the British period, 
are bitterly resented. History is almost always written by the 
victors and conquerors and gives their viewpoint; or, at any rate, 
the victors' version is given prominence and holds the field. Very 
probably all the early records we have of the Aryans in India, 
their epics and traditions, glorify the Aryans and are unfair to the 
people of the country whom they subdued. No individual can 
wholly rid himself of his racial outlook and cultural limitations, 
and when there is conflict between races and countries even an 
attempt at impartiality is considered a betrayal of one's own 
people. War, which is an extreme example of this conflict, results 
in a deliberate throwing overboard of all fairness and impartiality 
so far as the enemy nation is concerned; the mind coarsens and 
becomes closed to almost all avenues of approach except one. 
The overpowering need ofthe moment is tojustify one's own actions 
and condemn and blacken those ofthe enemy. Truth hides some- 
where at the bottom of the deepest well and falsehood, naked 
and unashamed, reigns almost supreme. 

Even when actual war is not being waged there is often potential 
war and conflicts between rival countries and interests. In a country 
dominated by an alien power that conflict is inherent and con- 
tinuous and affects and perverts people's thoughts and actions; 
the war mentality is never wholly absent. In the old days when 
war and its consequences, brutality and conquest and enslavement 
of a people, were accepted as belonging to the natural order of 
events, there was no particular need to cover them or justify them 
from some other point ofview. With the growth of higher standards 
the need for justification has arisen, and this leads to a perversion 
of facts, sometimes deliberate, often unconscious. Thus hypocrisy 

2X9 



pays its tribute to virtue, and a false and sickening piety allies itself 
to evil deeds. 

In any country, and especially in a huge country like India 
with its complicated history and mixed culture, it is always possible 
to find facts and trends to justify a particular thesis, and then this 
becomes the accepted basis for a new argument. America, it is 
said, is a land of contradictions, in spite of its standardization and 
uniformity. How much more then must India be full of contradic- 
tions and incongruities. We shall find there, as elsewhere, what we 
seek, and on this preconceived basis we can build up a structure 
of belief and opinion. And yet that structure will have untrue 
foundations and will give a false picture of reality. 

Recent Indian history, that is the history of the British period, 
is so connected with present-day happenings that the passions 
and prejudices of to-day powerfully influence our interpretation 
of it. Englishmen and Indians are both likely to err, though their 
errors will lie in opposite directions. Far the greater part of the 
records and papers out of which history takes shape and is written 
comes from British sources and inevitably represents the British 
point of view. The very circumstances of defeat and disruption 
prevented the Indian side of the story from being properly recorded, 
and many of the records that existed suffered destruction during the 
great Revolt of 1857. The papers that survived were hidden away in 
family archives and could not be published for fear of con- 
sequences. They remained dispersed, little known, and many 
perished in the manuscript stage from the incursion of termites and 
other insects which abound in the country. At a later stage when 
some of these papers were discovered they threw a new light on 
many historical incidents. Even British-written Indian history had 
to be somewhat modified, and the Indian conception, often very 
different from the British, took shape. Behind this conception lay 
also a mass of tradition and memories, not of the remote past but 
of a period when our grandfathers and great-grandfathers were 
the living witnesses and often the victims of events. As history this 
tradition may have little value, but it is important as it enables 
us to understand the background of the Indian mind to-day. 
The villain of the British in India is often a hero to Indians, and 
those whom the British have delighted to honour and reward are 
often traitors and quislings in the eyes of the great majority of the 
Indian people. That taint clings to their descendants. 

The history of the American Revolution has been differently 
written by Englishmen and Americans, and even to-day when 
old passions have subsided and there is friendship between the 
two peoples each version is resented by the other party. In our 
own day Lenin was a monster and a brigand to many English 
statesmen of high repute, yet millions have considered him as a 
saviour and the greatest man of the age. These comparisons will 

290 



give us some faint idea of the resentment felt by Indians at being 
forced to study in their schools and colleges so-called histories which 
disparage India's past in every way, vilify those whose memory 
they cherish, and honour and glorify the achievements of British 
rule in India. 

Gopal Krishna Gokhale once wrote in his gently ironical way 
of the inscrutable wisdom of Providence which had ordained 
the British connection for India. Whether it was due to this 
inscrutable wisdom or to some process of historic destiny or just 
chance, the coming of the British to India brought two very 
different races together; or, at any rate, it should have brought 
them together, but as it happened they seldom approached each 
other and their contacts were indirect. English literature and 
English political thought influenced a tiny fringe of those who had 
learned English. But this political thought, though dynamic in its 
context, had no reality in India then. The British who came to 
India were not political or social revolutionaries; they were con- 
servatives representing the most reactionary social class in England, 
and England was in some ways one of the most conservative coun- 
tries in Europe. 

The impact of western culture on India was the impact of a 
dynamic society, of a 'modern' consciousness, on a static society 
wedded to medieval habits of thought which, however sophisti- 
cated and advanced in its own way, could not progress because of 
its inherent limitations. And, yet, curiously enough the agents 
of this historic process were not only wholly unconscious of their 
mission in India but, as a class, actually represented no such 
process. In England their class fought this historic process but 
the forces opposed to them were too strong and could not be held 
back. In India they had a free field and were successful in applying 
the brakes to that very change and progress which, in the larger 
context, they represented. They encouraged and consolidated 
the position of the socially reactionary groups in India, and opposed 
all those who worked for political and social change. If change 
came it was in spite of them or as an incidental and unexpected 
consequence of their activities. The introduction of the steam engine 
and the railway was a big step towards a change of the mediaeval 
structure, but it was intended to consolidate their rule and facilitate 
the exploitation for their own benefit of the interior of the country. 
This contradiction between the deliberate policy of the British 
authorities in India and some of its unintended consequences 
produces a certain confusion and masks that policy itself. Change 
came to India because of this impact of the west, but it came 
almost in spite of the British in India. They succeeded in slowing 
down the pace of that change to such an extent that even to-day 
the transition is very far from complete. 

The feudal landlords and their kind who came from England 

291 



to rule over India had the landlord's view of the world. To 
them India was a vast estate belonging to the East India Com- 
pany, and the landlord was the best and the natural representa- 
tive of his estate and his tenants. That view continued even 
after the East India Company handed over its estate of India 
to the British Crown, being paid very handsome compensation 
at India's cost. (Thus began the public debt of India. It war. 
India's purchase money, paid by India.) The British Govern- 
ment of India then became the landlords (or landlords' agents). 
For all practical purposes they considered themselves 'India', 
just as the Duke of Devonshire might be considered 'Devonshire' 
by his peers. The millions of people who lived and functioned 
in India were just some kind of landlord's tenants who had to pay 
their rents and cesses and to keep their place in the natural feudal 
order. For them a challenge to that order was an offence against 
the very moral basis of the universe and a denial of a divine dis- 
pensation. 

This somewhat metaphysical conception of British rule in 
India has not changed fundamentally, though it is expressed 
differently now. The old method of obvious rack-renting gave 
place to more subtle and devious devices. It was admitted that 
the landlord should be benevolent towards his tenantry and 
should seek to advance their interests. It was even agreed that 
some of the more loyal and faithful among the tenants should 
be promoted to the estate office and share in a subordinate way 
in the administration. But no challenge to the system of land- 
lordism could be tolerated. The estate must continue to function 
as it used to even when it changed hands. When pressure of 
events made some such change inevitable, it was stipulated that 
all the faithful employees in the estate office should continue, all 
the old and new friends, followers and dependants of the landlord 
should be provided for, the old age pensioners should continue 
to draw their pensions, the old landlord himself should now func- 
tion as a benevolent patron and adviser of the estate, and thus all 
attempts to bring about essential changes should be frustrated. 

This sense of identifying India with their own interests was 
strongest in the higher administrative services, which were entirely 
British. In later years these developed in that close and well-knit 
corporation called the Indian Civil Service — 'the world's most 
tenacious trade union,' as it has been called by an English writer. 
They ran India, they were India, and anything that was harmful 
to their interests must of necessity be injurious to India. From 
the Indian Civil Service and the kind of history and record of 
current events that was placed before them, this conception spread 
in varying degrees to the different strata of the British people. 
The ruling class naturally shared it in full measure, but even the 
worker and the farmer were influenced by it to some slight extent, 

292 



and felt, in spite of their own subordinate position in their own 
country, the pride of possession and empire. That same worker or 
farmer if he came to India inevitably belonged to the ruling class 
here. He was totally ignorant of India's history and culture and 
he accepted the prevailing ideology of the British in India, for he 
had no other standards to judge by or apply. At the most a vague 
benevolence filled him, but that was strictly conditioned within 
that framework. For a hundred years this ideology permeated all 
sections of the British people, and became, as it were, a national 
heritage, a fixed and almost unalterable notion, which governed 
their outlook on India and imperceptibly affected even their 
domestic outlook. In our own day that curious group which has 
no fixed standards or principles or much knowledge of the out- 
side world, the leaders of the British Labour Party, have usually 
been the staunchest supporters of the existing order in India. 
Sometimes a vague sense of uneasiness fills them at a seeming 
contradiction between their domestic and colonial policy, bet- 
ween their professions and practice, but, considering themselves 
above all as practical men of commonsense, they sternly repress 
all these stirrings of conscience. Practical men must necessarily 
base themselves on established and known practice, on existing 
conditions, and not take a leap into the dark unknown merely 
because of some principle or untested theory. 

Viceroys who come to India direct from England have to fit 
in with and rely upon the Indian Civil Service structure. Be- 
longing to the possessing and ruling class in England, they have 
no difficulty whatever in accepting the prevailing I.C.S. outlook, 
and their unique position of absolute authority, unparalleled 
elsewhere, leads to subtle changes in their ways and methods of 
expression. Authority corrupts and absolute authority corrupts 
absolutely, and no man in the wide world to-day has had or has 
such absolute authority over such large number of people as 
the British Viceroy of India. The Viceroy speaks in a manner 
such as no Prime Minister of England or President of the United 
States can adopt. The only possible parallel would be that of Hitler. 
And not the Viceroy only, but the British members of his Council, 
the Governors, and even the smaller fry who function as secretaries 
of departments or magistrates. They speak from a noble and 
unattainable height, secure not only in the conviction that what 
they say and do is right, but that it will have to be accepted as 
right whatever lesser mortals may imagine, for theirs is the power 
and the glory. 

Some members of the Viceroy's Council are appointed direct 
from England and do not belong to the Indian Civil Service. 
There is usually a marked difference in their ways and utter- 
ances from those of the Civil Service. They function easily 
enough in that framework, but they cannot quite develop that 

293 



superior and self-satisfied air of assured authority. Much less 
can the Indian members of the Council (a fairly recent addi- 
tion), who are obvious supers, whatever their numbers or intelli- 
gence. Indians belonging to the Civil Service, whatever their 
rank in the official hierarchy, do not belong to the charmed circle. 
A few of them try to ape the manners of their colleagues without 
much success; they become rather pompous and ridiculous. 

The new generation of British members of the Indian Civil 
Service are, I believe, somewhat different in mind and texture 
from their predecessors. They do not easily fit into the old frame- 
work, but all authority and policy flow from the senior members 
and the newcomers make no difference. They have either to accept 
the established order or, as has sometimes happened, resign and 
return to their homeland. 

I remember that when I was a boy the British-owned news- 
papers in India were full of official news and utterances; of 
service news, transfers and promotions; of the doings of English 
society, of polo, races, dances, and amateur theatricals. There 
was hardly a word about the people of India, about their political, 
cultural, social, or economic life. Reading them one would hardly 
suspect that they existed. 

In Bombay there used to be quadrangular cricket matches 
between four elevens made up respectively of Hindus, Moslems, 
Parsees, and Europeans. The European eleven was called 
Bombay Presidency; the others were just Hindus, Moslems, 
Parsees. Bombay was thus essentially represented by the Euro- 
peans; the others, one would imagine, were foreign elements 
who were recognized for this purpose. These quadrangular 
matches still take place, though there is much argument about 
them, and a demand that elevens should not be chosen on religious 
lines. I believe that the 'Bombay Presidency' team is now called 
'European.' 

English clubs in India usually have territorial names — the 
Bengal Club, the Allahabad Club, etc. They arc confined to 
Britishers, or rather to Europeans. There need be no objection 
to territorial designation, or even to a group of persons having 
a club for themselves and not approving of outsiders joining 
it. But this designation is derived from the old British habit of 
considering that they are the real India that counts, the real 
Bengal, the real Allahabad. Others are just excrescences, useful 
in their own way if they know their places, but otherwise a 
nuisance. The exclusion of non-Europeans is far more a racial 
affair than a justifiable means for people with cultural affinities 
to meet together in their leisure moments for play and social 
intercourse, without the intrusion of other elements. For my 
part I have no objection to exclusive English or European clubs, 
and very few Indians would care to join them; but when this 

294 



social exclusiveness is clearly based on racialism and on a ruling 
class always exhibiting its superiority and unapproachability, it 
bears another aspect. In Bombay there is a well-known club which 
did not allow and so far as I know, does not allow, an Indian 
(except as a servant) even in its visitors' room, even though he 
might be a ruling prince or a captain of industiy. 

Racialism in India is not so much English versus Indian; it 
is European as opposed to Asiatic. In India every European, be 
he German, or Pole, or Rumanian, is automatically a member 
of the ruling race. Railway carriages, station retiring-rooms, 
benches in parks, etc., are marked 'For Europeans Only.' This 
is bad enough in South Africa or elsewhere, but to have to put 
up with it in one's own country is a humiliating and exasperat- 
ing reminder of one's enslaved condition. 

It is true that a gradual change has been taking place in these 
external manifestations of racial superiority and imperial arro- 
gance, but the process is slow and frequent instances occur to show 
how superficial it is. Political pressure and the rise of a militant 
nationalism enforce change and lead to a deliberate attempt to 
tone down the former racialism and aggressiveness; and yet that 
very political movement, when it reaches a stage of crisis and is 
sought to be crushed, leads to a resurgence of all the old imperialist 
and racial arrogance in its extremest form. 

The English are a sensitive people, and yet when they go 
to foreign countries there is a strange lack of awareness about 
them. In India, where the relation of ruler and ruled makes 
mutual understanding difficult, this lack of awareness is pecu- 
liarly evident. Almost one would think that it is deliberate, so 
that they may see only what they want to see and be blind to 
all else; but facts do not vanish because they are ignored, and 
when they compel attention there is a feeling of displeasure and 
resentment at the unexpected happening, as of some trick having 
been played. 

In this land of caste the British, and more especially the Indian 
Civil Service, have built up a caste which is rigid and exclusive. 
Even the Indian members of the service do not really belong to 
that caste, though they wear the insignia and conform to its rules. 
That caste has developed something in the nature of a religious 
faith in its own paramount importance, and round that faith has 
grown an appropriate mythology which helps to maintain it. A 
combination of faith and vested interests is a powerful one, and any 
challenge to it arouses the deepest passions and fierce indignation. 

The Plunder ofBengal helps the Industrial Revolution 
in England 

The East India Company had received permission from the 

295 



Mughal Emperor to start a factory at Surat early in the seven- 
teenth century. Some years later they purchased a patch of land 
in the south and founded Madras. In 1662 the island of Bombay 
was presented to Charles II of England by way of dowry from 
Portugal, and he transferred it to the company. In 1690 the 
city of Calcutta was founded. Thus by the end of the seven- 
teenth century the British had gained a number of footholds 
in India and established some bridge-heads on the Indian coast- 
line. They spread inland slowly. The battle of Plassey in 1757 
for the first time brought a vast area under their control, and 
within a few years Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, and the east coast were 
subject to them. The next big step forward was taken about forty 
years later, at the beginning of the nineteenth century. This 
jrought them to the gates of Delhi. The third major advance 
took place after the last defeat ofthe Marathas in 1818; the fourth 
in 1849, after the Sikh wars, completed the picture. 

Thus the British have been in the city of Madras a little over 
300 years; they have ruled Bengal, Bihar, etc., for 187 years; they 
extended their domination over the south 145 years ago; they 
established themselves in the United Provinces (as they are now 
called), central and western India about 125 years ago; and they 
spread to the Punjab ninety-five years ago. (This is being written 
in June, 1944.) Leaving out the city of Madras as too small an 
area, there is a difference of nearly 100 years between their 
occupation of Bengal and that ofthe Punjab. During this period 
British policy and administrative methods changed repeatedly. 
These changes were dictated by new developments in England 
as well as the consolidation of British rule in India. The treat- 
ment of each newly acquired area varied according to these 
changes, and depended also on the character of the ruling group 
which had been defeated by the British. Thus in Bengal, where 
the victory had been very easy, the Moslem landed gentry were 
looked upon as the ruling classes and a policy was pursued to 
break their power. In the Punjab, on the other hand, power 
was seized from the Sikhs and there was no initial antagonism 
between the British and (he Moslems. In the greater part of 
India the Marathas had been opponents ofthe British. 

A significant fact which stands out is that those parts of India 
which have been longest under British rule are the poorest to-day. 
Indeed some kind of chart might be drawn up to indicate the 
close connection between length of British rule and progressive 
growth of poverty. A few large cities and some new industrial 
areas do not make any essential difference to this survey. What 
is noteworthy is the condition ofthe masses as a whole, and there 
can be no doubt that the poorest parts of India are Bengal, Bihar, 
Orissa, and parts of the Madras presidency; the mass level and 
standards of living are highest in the Punjab. Bengal certainly was 

296 



a very rich and prosperous province before the British came. 
There may be many reasons for these contrasts and differences. 
But it is difficult to get over the fact that Bengal, once so rich and 
flourishing, after 187 years of British rule, accompanied, as we are 
told, by strenuous attempts on the part of the British to improve its 
condition and to teach its people the art of self-government, is 
to-day, a miserable mass of poverty-stricken, starving, and dying 
people. 

Bengal had the first full experience of British rule in India. 
That rule began with outright plunder, and a land revenue sys- 
tem which extracted the uttermost farthing not only from the 
living but also from the dead cultivators. The English historians 
of India, Edward Thompson and G. T. Garrett, tell us that 'a 
gold-lust unequalled since the hysteria that took hold of the 
Spaniards of Cortes' and Pizarro's age filled the English mind. 
Bengal in particular was not to know peace again until she has 
been bled white.' 'For the monstrous financial immorality of the 
English conduct in India for many a year after this, Glive was 
largely responsible.'* Clive, the great empire-builder, whose 
statue faces the India Office in London to-day. It was pure loot. 
The 'Pagoda tree' was shaken again and again till the most terrible 
famines ravaged Bengal. This process was called trade later on 
but that made little difference. Government was this so-called 
trade, and trade was plunder. There are few instances in history 
of anything like it. And it must be remembered that this lasted, 
under various names and under different forms, not for a few years 
but for generations. The outright plunder gradually took the shape 
of legalized exploitation which, though not so obvious, was in 
reality worse. The corruption, venality, nepotism, violence, and 
greed of money of these early generations of British rule in India 
is something which passes comprehension. It is significant that one 
of the Hindustani words which has become part of the English 
language is 'loot.' Says Edward Thompson, and this does not 
refer to Bengal only, 'one remembers the early history of British 
India which is perhaps the world's high-water mark of graft.' 

The result of all this, even in its early stages, was the famine 
of 1770, which swept away over a third of the population of 
Bengal and Bihar. But it was all in the cause of progress, and 
Bengal can take pride in the fact that she helped greatly in giving 
birth to the industrial revolution in England. The American 
writer, Brooke Adams, tells us exactly how this happened: 'The 
influx of Indian treasure, by adding considerably to the nation's 
cash capital, not only increased its stock of energy, but added 
much to its flexibility and the rapidity of its movement. Very 
soon after Plassey, the Bengal plunder began to arrive in London, 

* 'Rise and Fulfilment of British Rule in India' by Edward Thompson and G T. Garrett 
(London, 1935). 

297 



and the effect appears to have been instantaneous, for all authorities 

agree that the "industrial revolution" began with the year 1770 

Plassey was fought in 1757, and probably nothing has ever equalled 
the rapidity ofthe change that followed. In 1760 the flying shuttle 
appeared, and coal began to replace wood in smelting. In 1764 
Hargreaves invented the spinning jenny, in 1776 Grompton 
contrived the mule, in 1785 Cartwright patented the power loom 

and in 1768 Watt matured the steam engine But though 

these machines served as outlets for the accelerating movements 
of the time, they did not cause the acceleration. In themselves 
inventions are passive., .waiting for a sufficient store of force 
to have accumulated to set them working. That store must always 
take the shape of money, and money not hoarded but in motion. 
Before the influx of the Indian treasure, and the expansion of 

credit which followed, no force sufficient for this purpose existed 

Possibly since the world began, no investment has ever yielded the 
profit reaped from the Indian plunder, because for nearly fifty years 
Great Britain stood without a competitor.'* 

The Destruction of India's Industry and the Decay 
of her Agriculture 

The chief business ofthe East India Company in its early period, 
the very object for which it was started, was to carry Indian 
manufactured goods, textiles, etc., as well as spices and the like 
from the east to Europe, where there was a great demand for 
these articles. With the developments in industrial techniques 
in England a new class of industrial capitalists rose there, demand- 
ing a change in this policy. The British market was to be closed 
to Indian products and the Indian market opened to British manu- 
factures. The British Parliament, influenced by this new class, 
began to take a greater interest in India and the working of the 
East India Company. To begin with, Indian goods were excluded 
from Britain by legislation, and as the East India Company held a 
monopoly in the Indian export business, this exclusion influenced 
other foreign markets also. This was followed by vigorous attempts 
to restrict and crush Indian manufactures by various measures and 
internal duties which prevented the flow of Indian goods within 
the country itself. British goods meanwhile had free entry. The 
Indian textile industry collapsed, affecting vast numbers of weavers 
and artisans. The process was rapid in Bengal and Bihar, elsewhere 
it spread gradually with the expansion of British rule and the 
building of railways. It continued throughout the nineteenth 
century, breaking up other old industries also, ship-building, 
metal working, glass, paper, and many crafts. 

*Brooke Adams: 'The Law of Civilization and Decay' (1928), pp. 259-60, quoted by 
Kate Mitchel: 'India' (1943). 

298 



To some extent this was inevitable as the older manufactur- 
ing came into conflict with the new industrial technique. But 
it was hastened by political and economic pressure and no 
attempt was made to apply the new techniques to India. Indeed 
every attempt was made to prevent this happening, and thus 
the economic development of India was arrested and the growth 
of the new industry prevented. Machinery could not be import- 
ed into India. A vacuum was created which could only be filled 
by British goods, and which led to rapidly increasing unemploy- 
ment and poverty. The classic type of modern colonial economy 
was built up, India becoming an agricultural colony of indus- 
trial England, supplying raw materials and providing markets 
for England's industrial goods. 

The liquidation of the artisan class led to unemployment on 
a prodigious scale. What were all these scores of millions, who 
had so far been engaged in industry and manufacture, to do 
now ? Where were they to go ? Their old profession was no longer 
open to them, the way to a new one was barred. They could die of 
course; that way of escape from an intolerable situation is always 
open. They did die in tens of millions. The English Governor- 
General of India, Lord Bentinck, reported in 1834 that 'the misery 
hardly finds a parallel in the history of commerce. The bones of 
the cotton weavers are bleaching the plains of India.' 

But still vast numbers of them remained, and these increased 
from year to year as British policy affected remoter areas of the 
country and created more unemployment. All these hordes of 
artisans and craftsmen had no job, no work, and all their ancient 
skill was useless. They drifted to the land, for the land was still 
there. But the land was fully occupied and could not possibly 
absorb them profitably. So they became a burden on the land 
and the burden grew, and with it grew the poverty ofthe country, 
and the standard of living fell to incredibly low levels. This 
compulsory back-to-the-land movement of artisans and craftsmen 
led to an ever-growing disproportion between agriculture and 
industry; agriculture became more and more the sole business of 
the people because ofthe lack of occupations and wealth-producing 
activities. 

India became progressively ruralized. In every progressive 
country there has been, during the past century, a shift of 
population from agriculture to industry; from village to town; 
in India this process was reversed, as a result of British policy. 
The figures are instructive and significant. In the middle of the 
nineteenth century about fifty-five per cent of the population 
is said to have been dependent on agriculture; recently this propor- 
tion was estimated to be seventy-four per cent. (This is a pre-war 
figure.) Though there has been greater industrial employment 
during the war, the number of those dependent on agriculture 

299 



actually went up in the census of 1941 owing to increase of popula- 
tion. The growth of a few large cities (chiefly at the expense of the 
small town) is apt to mislead the superficial observer and give him 
a false idea of Indian conditions. 

This then is the real, the fundamental, cause of ihe appalling 
poverty of the Indian people, and it is of comparatively recent 
origin. Other causes that contribute to it are themselves the result 
of this poverty and chronic starvation and under-nourishment 
— like disease and illiteracy. Excessive population is unfortunate, 
and steps should be taken to curb it wherever necessary, but it 
still compares favourably with the density of population of many 
industrialized countries. It is only excessive for a predominantly 
agricultural community, and under a proper economic system the 
entire population can be made productive and should add to the 
wealth of the country. As a matter of fact great density of popu- 
lation exists only in special areas, like Bengal and the Gangetic 
Valley, and vast areas are still sparsely populated. It is worth 
remembering that Great Britain is more than twice as densely 
populated as India. 

The crisis in industry spread rapidly to the land and became 
a permanent crisis in agriculture. Holdings became smaller and 
smaller, and fragmentation proceeded to an absurd and fantastic 
degree. The burden of agricultural debt grew and ownership 
of the land often passed to moneylenders. The number of land- 
less labourers increased by the million. India was under an indus- 
trial-capitalist regime, but her economy was largely that of the 
pre-capitalist period, minus many of the wealth-producing ele- 
ments of that pre-capitalist economy. She became a passive agent 
of modern industrial capitalism, suffering all its ills and with hardly 
any of its advantages. 

The transition from a pre-industrialist economy to an economy 
of capitalist industrialism involves great hardship and heavy cost 
in human suffering borne by masses of people. This was especially 
so in the early days when no efforts were made to plan such a 
transition or to lessen its evil results, and everything was left to 
individual initiative. There was this hardship in England during the 
period of transition but, taken as a whole, it was not great as the 
change-over was rapid and the unemployment caused was soon 
absorbed by the new industries. But that did not mean that the cost 
in human suffering was not paid. It was indeed paid, and paid in 
full by others, particularly by the people of India, by famine and 
death and vast unemployment. It may be said that a great part of 
the costs of transition to industrialism in western Europe were paid 
for by India, China, and the other colonial countries, whose eco- 
nomy was dominated by the European powers. 

It is obvious that there has been all along abundant material in 
India for industrial development — managerial and technical ability, 

300 



skilled workers, even some capital in spite of the continuous drain 
from India. The historian, Montgomery Martin, giving evidence 
before an Inquiry Committee of the British Parliament in 1840, 
said: 'India is as much a manufacturing country as an agriculturist; 
and he who would seek to reduce her to the position of an agri- 
cultural country, seeks to lower her in the scale of civilization.' 
That is exactly what the British, in India sought to do, continuously 
and persistently, and the measure of their success is the present 
condition of India, after they have held despotic sway there for a 
century and a half. Ever since the demand for the development of 
modern industry arose in India (and this, I imagine, is at least 100 
years old) we have been told that India is pre-eminently an agri- 
cultural country and it is in her interest to stick to agriculture. 
Industrial development may upset the balance and prove harm- 
ful to her main business — agriculture. The solicitude which British 
industrialists and economists have shown for the Indian peasant 
has been truly gratifying. In view of this, as well as of the tender 
care lavished upon him- by the British Government in India, one 
can only conclude that some all-powerful and malign fate, some 
supernatural agency, has countered their intentions and measures 
and made that peasant one of the poorest and most miserable beings 
on earth. 

It is difficult now for anyone to oppose industrial development in 
India but, even now, when any extensive and far-reaching plan is 
drawn up, we are warned by our British friends, who continue to 
shower their advice upon us, that agriculture must not be neglected 
and must have first place. As if any Indian with an iota of intelli- 
gence can ignore or neglect agriculture or forget the peasant. The 
Indian peasant is India more than anyone else, and it is on his 
progress and betterment that India's progress will depend. But 
our crisis in agriculture, grave as it is, is interlinked with the crisis 
in industry, out of which it arose. The two cannot be disconnected 
and dealt with separately, and it is essential for the disproportion 
between the two to be remedied. 

India's ability to develop modern industry can be seen by her 
success in it whenever she has had the chance to build it up. Indeed, 
such success has been achieved in spite of the strenuous oppo- 
sition of the British Government in India and of vested interests 
in Britain. Her first real chance came during the war of 1914-18 
when the inflow of British goods was interrupted. She profited by it, 
though only to a relatively small extent because of British policy. 
Ever since then there has been continuous pressure on the Govern- 
ment to facilitate the growth of Indian industry by removing the 
various barriers and special interests that come in the way. While 
apparently accepting this as its policy, the Government has ob- 
structed all real growth, especially of basic industries. Even in the 
Constitution Act of 1935 it was specifically laid down that Indian 

301 



legislatures could not interfere with the vested interests of British 
industry in India. The pre-war years witnessed repeated and vigor- 
ous attempts to build up basic and heavy industries, all scotched 
by official policy. But the most amazing instances of official obstruc- 
tion have been during the present war, when war needs for pro- 
duction were paramount. Even those vital needs were not suffi- 
cient to overcome British dislike of Indian industry. That industry 
has grown because of the force of events, but its growth is trivial 
compared to what it could have been or to the growth of industry 
in many other countries. 

The direct opposition of the earlier periods to the growth of 
Indian industry gave place to indirect methods, which have been 
equally effective, just as direct tribute gave place to manipulation 
of customs and excise duties and financial and currency policies, 
which benefited Britain at the expense of India. 

Long subjection of a people and the denial of freedom bring 
many evils, and perhaps the greatest of these lies in the spiritual 
sphere — demoralization and sapping of the spirit of the people. 
It is hard to measure this, though it may be obvious. It is easier 
to trace and measure the economic decay of a nation, and as we 
look back on British economic policy in India, it seems that the 
present poverty of the Indian people is the ineluctable conse- 
quence of it. There is no mystery about this poverty; we can see 
the causes and follow the processes which have led to the present 
condition. 

India Becomes for the First Time a Political and 
Economic Appendage of Another Country 

The establishment of British rule in India was an entirely novel 
phenomenon for her, not comparable with any other invasion 
or political or economic change. 'India had been conquered before, 
but by invaders who settled within her frontiers and made them- 
selves part of her life.' (Like the Normans in England or the 
Manchus in China.)' She had never lost her independence, never 
been enslaved. That is to say, she had never been drawn into a 
political and economic system whose centre of gravity lay outside 
her soil, never been subjected to & ruling class which was, and 
which remained, permanently alien in origin and character.'* 
Every previous ruling class, whether it had originally come 
from outside or was indigenous, had accepted the structural unity 
of India's social and economic life and tried to fit into it. It had 
become Indianised and had struck roots in the soil of the country. 
The new rulers were entirely different, with their base elsewhere, 
and between them and the average Indian there was a vast and 

*K. S. Shelvankar: 'The Problem of India' (Penguin Special, London, 1940). 
302 



unbridgeable gulf — a difference in tradition, in outlook, in income, 
and ways of living. The early Britishers in India, rather cut off 
from England, adopted many Indian ways of living. But it was 
a superficial approach and even this was deliberately abandoned 
with the improvement in communications between India and 
England. It was felt that the British ruling class must maintain its 
prestige in India by keeping aloof, exclusive, apart from Indians, 
living in a superior world of its own. There were two worlds: the 
world of British officials and the world of India's millions, and there 
was nothing in common between them except a common dislike 
for each other. Previously races had merged into one another, or 
at least fitted into an organically interdependent structure. Now 
racialism became the acknowledged creed and this was intensified 
by the fact that the dominant race had both political and economic 
power, without check or hindrance. 

The world market that the new capitalism was building up 
would have, in any event, affected India's economic system. The 
self-sufficient village community, with its traditional division of 
labour, could not have continued in its old form. But the change 
that took place was not a normal development and it disintegrated 
the whole economic and structural basis of Indian society. A 
system which had social sanctions and controls behind it and was 
a part of the people's cultural heritage was suddenly and forcibly 
changed and another system, administered from outside the group, 
was imposed. India did not come into a world market but became 
a colonial and agricultural appendage of the British structure. 

The village community, which had so far been the basis of 
Indian economy, was disintegrated, losing both its economic and 
administrative functions. In 1830, Sir Charles Metcalfe, one of 
the ablest of British officials in India, described these communi- 
ties in words which have often been quoted: 'The village com- 
munities are little republics having nearly everything they want 
within themselves; and almost independent of foreign relations. 
They seem to last where nothing else lasts. This union of the 
village communities, each one forming a separate little state in 
itself. ..is in a high degree conducive to their happiness, and to 
the enjoyment of a great portion of freedom and independence.' 

The destruction of village industries was a powerful blow to 
these communities. The balance between industry and agricul- 
ture was upset, the traditional division of labour was broken 
up, and numerous stray individuals could not be easily fitted 
into any group activity. A, more direct blow came from the intro- 
duction of the landlord system, changing the whole conception 
of ownership of land. This conception had been one of commu- 
nal ownership, not so much of the land as of the produce of the 
land. Possibly not fully appreciating this, but more probably 
taking the step deliberately for reasons of their own, the British 

303 



governors, themselves representing the English landlord class, 
introduced something resembling the English system in India. 
At first they appointed revenue-farmers for short terms, that is 
persons who were made responsible for the collection of the 
revenue or land tax and payment of it to the Government. 
Later these revenue-farmers developed into landlords. The village 
community was deprived of all control over the land and its 
produce; what had always been considered as the chief interest 
and concern of that community now became the private property 
of the newly created landowner. This led to the breakdown of 
the joint life and corporate character of the community, and the 
co-operative system of services and functions began to disappear 
gradually. 

The introduction of this type of property in land was not only 
a great economic change, but it went deeper and struck at the 
whole Indian conception of a co-operative group social structure. 
A new class, the owners of land, appeared; a class created by, and 
therefore to a large extent identified with, the British Government. 
The break-up of the old system created new problems and probably 
the beginnings of the new Hindu-Moslem problem can be traced 
to it. The landlord system was first introduced in Bengal and 
Bihar where big landowners were created under the system known 
as the Permanent Settlement. It was later realized that this was 
not advantageous to the state as the land revenue had been fixed 
and could not be enhanced. Fresh settlements in other parts of 
India were therefore made for a period only and enhancements 
in revenue took place from time to time. In some provinces a kind 
of peasant proprietorship was established. The extreme rigour 
applied to the collection of revenue resulted, especially in Bengal, 
in the ruin of the old landed gentry, and new people from the 
monied and business classes took their place. Thus Bengal became 
a province predominantly of Hindu landlords, while their tenants, 
though both Hindu and Moslem, were chiefly the latter. 

Big landowners were created by the British after their own 
English pattern, chiefly because it was far easier to deal with a 
few individuals than with a vast peasantry. The objective was to 
collect as much money in the shape of revenue, and as speedily, 
as possible. If an owner failed at the stipulated time he was 
immediately pushed out and another took his place It was also 
considered necessary to create a class whose interests were iden- 
tified with the British. The fear of revolt filled the minds of British 
officials in India and they referred to this repeatedly In their 
papers. Governor-General Lord William Bentinck said in 1829: 
'If security was wanting against extensive popular tumult or 
revolution, I should say that the Permanent Settlement, though 
a failure in many other respects, has this great advantage at least, 
of having created a vast body of rich landed proprietors deeply 

304 



interested in the continuance of British Dominion and having 
complete command over the mass of the people.' 

British rule thus consolidated itself by creating new classes and 
vested interests which were tied up with that rule and privileges 
which depended on its continuance. There were the landowners 
and the princes, and there was a large number of subordinate 
members of the services in various departments of government, 
from the patwari, the village head-man, upwards. The two essential 
branches of government were the revenue system and the police. 
At the head of both of these in each district was the collector or 
district magistrate who was the linchpin of the administration. 
He functioned as an autocrat in his district, combining in himself 
executive, judicial, revenue, and police functions. If there were 
any small Indian states adjoining the area under his control, 
he was also the British agent for them. 

Then there was the Indian Army, consisting of British and 
Indian troops but officered entirely by Englishmen. This was 
reorganized repeatedly, especially after the mutiny of 1857, and 
ultimately became organizationally linked up with the British 
Army. This was so arranged as to balance its different elements 
and keep the British troops in key positions. 'Next to the grand 
counterpoise of a sufficient European force comes the counter- 
poise of natives against natives,' says the official report on re- 
organization in 1858. The primary function of these forces was 
to serve as an army of occupation — 'Internal Security Troops' 
they were called, and a majority of these was British. The Frontier 
Province served as a training ground for the British Army at 
India's expense. The Field Army (chiefly Indian) was meant for 
service abroad and it took part in numerous British imperial 
wars and expeditions, India always bearing the cost. Steps were 
taken to segregate Indian troops from the rest of the population. 

Thus India had to bear the cost of her own conquest, and then 
of her transfer (or sale) from the East India Company to the 
British Crown, for the extension of the British Empire to Burma 
and elsewhere, for expeditions to Africa, Persia, etc., and for 
her defence against Indians themselves. She was not only used as 
a base for imperial purposes, without any reimbursement for this, 
but she had further to pay for the training of part of the British 
Army in England — 'capitation' charges these were called. Indeed 
India was charged for all manner of other expenses incurred by 
Britain, such as the maintenance of British diplomatic and con- 
sular establishments in China and Persia, the entire cost of the 
telegraph line from England'to India, part of the expenses of the 
British Mediterranean fleet, and even the receptions given to 
the Sultan of T ur key in London. 

The building of railways in India, undoubtedly desirable and 
necessary, was done in an enormously wasteful way. The Govern- 

305 



merit of India guaranteed 5 per cent interest on all capital invested 
and there was no need to check or estimate what was necessary. 
All purchases were made in England. 

The civil establishment of government was also run on a lavish 
and extravagant scale, all the highly paid positions being reserved 
for Europeans. The process of Indianization of the administrative 
machine was very slow and only became noticeable in the twentieth 
century. This process, far from transferring any power to Indian 
hands, proved yet another method of strengthening British rule. 
The really key positions remained in British hands, and Indians 
in the administration could only function as the agents of British 
rule. 

To all these methods must be added the deliberate policy, 
pursued throughout the period of British rule, or creating divi- 
sions among Indians, of encouraging one group at the cost of 
another. This policy was openly admitted in the early days of 
their rule, and indeed it was a natural one for an imperial power. 
With the growth of the nationalist movement that policy took 
subtler and more dangerous forms and, though denied, functioned 
more intensively than ever. 

Nearly all our major problems to-day have grown up during 
British rule and as a direct result of British policy: the princes; 
the minority problem; various vested interests, foreign and 
Indian; the lack of industry and the neglect of agriculture; the 
extreme backwardness in the social services; and, above all, the 
tragic poverty of the people. The attitude to education has been 
significant. In Kaye's 'Life of Metcalfe' it is stated that 'this 
dread of the free diffusion of knowledge became a chronic disease 
. . . continually afflicting the members of Government with all 
sorts of hypochondriacal day-dreams and nightmares, in which 
visions of the printing press and the Bible were making their flesh 
creep, and their hair to stand erect with horror. It was our policy 
in those days to keep the natives of India in the profoundest state 
of barbarism and darkness, and every attempt to diffuse the 
light of knowledge among the people, either of our own or of the 
independent states, was vehemently opposed and resented.'* 

Imperialism must function in this way or else it ceases to be 
imperialism. The modern type of finance-imperialism added new 
kinds of economic exploitation which were unknown in earlier 
ages. The record of British rule in India during the nineteenth 
century must necessarily depress and anger an Indian, and yet 
it illustrates the superiority of the British in many fields, not 
least in their capacity to profit by our disunity and weaknesses. 
A people who are weak and who are left behind in the march 
of time invite trouble and ultimately have only themselves to 

* Quoted by Edward Thompson, 'The Life of Lord Metcalfe: 
306 



blame. If British imperialism with all its consequences was, in 
the circumstances, to be expected in the natural order of events, 
so also was the growth of opposition to it inevitable, and the final 
crisis between the two. 

The Growth of the Indian States System 

One of our major problems in India to-day is that of the Princes 
of the Indian states. These states are unique of their kind in the 
world and they vary greatly in size and political and social con- 
ditions. Their number is 601. About fifteen of these may be 
considered major states, the biggest of these being Hyderabad, 
Kashmir, Mysore, Travancore, Baroda, Gwalior, Indore, Cochin, 
Jaipur, Jodhpur, Bikanir, Bhopal, and Patiala. Then follow a 
number of middling states and, lastly, several hundreds of very 
small areas, some not bigger than a pin's point on the map. 
Most of these tiny states are in Kathiawar, western India, and 
the Punjab. 

These states not only vary in size from that of France to almost 
that of an average farmer's holding, but also differ in every other 
way. Mysore is industrially the most advanced; Mysore, Travan- 
core, and Cochin are educationally far ahead of British India.* 
Most of the states are, however, very backward and some are 
completely feudal. All of them are autocracies, though some have 
started elected councils whose powers are strictly limited. Hydera- 
bad, the premier state, still carries on with a typical feudal regime 
supported by an almost complete denial of civil liberties. So also 
most of the states in Rajputana and the Punjab. A lack of civil 
liberties is a common feature of the states. 

These states do not form compact blocks; they are spread out 
all over India, islands surrounded by non-state areas. The vast 
majority of them are totally unable to support even a semi- 
independent economy; even the largest, situated as they are, can 
hardly hope to do so without the full co-operation of the surround- 
ing areas. If there was any economic conflict between a state 
and non-state India, the former could be easily reduced to sub- 
mission by tariff barriers and other economic sanctions. It is mani- 
fest that both politically and economically these states, even the 
largest of them, cannot be separated and treated as independent 
entities. As such they would not survive and the rest of India 
would also suffer greatly. They would become hostile enclaves all 

* Travancore, Cochin, Mysore, and Baroda are, from the point of view of popular educa- 
tion, far in advance of British India. In Travancore, it is interesting to note that popular 
education began to be organized in 1801. (Compare England where it started in 1870.) 

The literacy percentage in Travancore is now 58for men and 41 for women ; this is over four 
limes higher than the British India percentage. Public health is also better organized in 

Travancore. Women play an important part in public service and activities in Travancore. 

307 



over India, and if they relied on some external power for protec- 
tion, this in itself would be a continuous and serious menace to 
a free India. Indeed they would not have survived till to-day but 
for the fact that politically and economically the whole of India, 
including the states, is under one dominant power which protects 
them. Apart from the possible conflicts between a state and non- 
state India, it must be remembered that there is continuous pres- 
sure on the autocratic ruler of the state from his own people, who 
demand free institutions. Attempts to achieve this freedom are 
suppressed and kept back with the aid of the British power. 

Even in the nineteenth century, these states, as constituted, 
became anachronisms. Under modern conditions it is impossible 
to conceive of India being split up into scores of separate inde- 
pendent entities. Not only would there be perpetual conflict but 
all planned economic and cultural progress would become impos- 
sible. We must remember that when these states took shape and 
entered into treaties with the East India Company, at the begin- 
ning of the nineteenth century, Europe was divided up into 
numerous small principalities. Many wars and revolutions have 
changed the face of Europe since then and are changing it to-day, 
but the face of India was set and petrified by external pressure 
imposed upon it and not allowed to change. It seems absurd to 
hold up some treaty drawn up 140 years ago, usually on the field 
of battle or immediately afterwards, between two rival commanders 
or their chiefs, and to say that this temporary settlement must 
last for ever. The people of the state of course had no say in that 
settlement, and the other party at the time was a commercial 
corporation concerned only with its own interests and profits. 
This commercial corporation, the East India Company, acted 
not as the agent of the British Crown or Parliament but, in theory, 
as the agent ofthe Delhi Emperor, from whom power and authority 
were supposed to flow, although he was himself quite powerless. 
The British Crown or Parliament had nothing whatever to do with 
these treaties. Parliament only considered Indian affairs when the 
charter of the East India Company came up for discussion from 
time to time. The fact that the East India Company was function- 
ing in India under the authority conferred on it by the Diwani 
grant ofthe Mughal Emperor made it independent of any direct 
interference by the British Crown or Parliament. Indirectly Parlia- 
ment could, if it so chose, cancel the charter or impose new condi- 
tions at the time of renewal. The idea that the English King or 
Parliament should even in theory function as agents and therefore 
as subordinates ofthe shadowy Emperor at Delhi was not liked in 
England and so they studiously kept aloof from the activities of 
the East India Company. The money spent in the Indian wars was 
Indian money raised and disposed of by the East India Company. 

Subsequently, as the territory under the control of the East 

308 



India Company increased in area and its rule was consolidated, 
the British Parliament began to take greater interest in Indian 
affairs. In 1858, after the shock of the Indian mutiny and revolt, 
the East India Company transferred its domain of India (for 
money paid by India) to the British crown. That transfer did not 
involve a separate transfer of the Indian states apart from the rest 
of India. The whole of India was treated as a unit and the British 
Parliament functioned in India through the Government of India 
which exercised a suzerainty over the states. The states had no 
separate relations with the British Crown or Parliament. They 
were part and parcel of the system of government, direct and 
indirect, represented by the Government of India. This govern- 
ment, in later years, ignored those old treaties whenever it suited 
its changing policy to do so, and exercised a very effective suzer- 
ainty over the states. 

Thus the British Crown was not in the picture at all so far as 
the Indian states were concerned. It is only in recent years that 
the claim to some kind of independence has been raised on behalf 
of the states, and it has been further claimed that they have some 
special relations with the British Crown, apart from the Govern- 
ment of India. These treaties, it should be noted, are with very 
few of the states; there are only forty treaty states, the rest have 
'engagements and sanads.' These forty states have three-fourths 
ofthe total Indian state population, and six of them have consider- 
ably more than one-third of this population.* 

In the Government of India Act of 1935, for the first time, some 
distinction was made between the relations of the states and the 
rest of India with the British Parliament. The states were removed 
from the supervisory authority and direction of the Government 
of India and placed directly under the Viceroy who, for this purpose, 
was called the Crown representative. The Viceroy continued to be, 
at the same time, the head of the Government of India. The poli- 
tical department of the Government of India, which used to be 
responsible for the states, was now placed directly under the 
Viceroy and was no longer under his executive council. 

How did these states come into existence? Some are quite new, 
created by the British; others were the vice-royalties ofthe Mughal 
Emperor, and their rulers were permitted to continue as feudatory 
chiefs by the British; yet others, notably the Maratha chiefs, were 
defeated by British armies and then made into feudatories. Nearly 
all these can be traced back to the beginnings of British rule; 
they have no earlier history. If some of them functioned indepen- 
dently for a while, that independence was of brief duration and 
ended in defeat in war or threat of war. Only a few ofthe states, 

* These six are: Hyderabad, 12-13 million; Mysore, 7\ million; Travancore, 6'J million; 
Baroda, 4 million; Kashmir, 3 million; Gwalior, 3 million; totalling over 36 million. The 
total Indian states population is about 90 million. 

309 



and these are chiefly in Rajputana, date back to pre-Mughal times. 
Travancore has an ancient, 1,000-year-old historical continuity. 
Some ofthe proud Rajput clans trace back their genealogy to pre- 
historic times. The Maharana of Udaipur, of the Suryavansh or 
race ofthe sun, has a family tree comparable to that ofthe Mikado 
ofJapan. But these Rajput chiefs became Mughal feudatories and 
then submitted to the Marathas, and finally to the British. The 
representatives ofthe East India Company, writes Edward Thomp- 
son, 'now set the princes in their positions, lifting them out 
of the chaos in which they were submerged. When thus picked 
up and re-established, "the princes" were as completely helpless 
and derelict as any powers since the beginning ofthe world. Had 
the British Government not intervened, nothing but exstinction lay 
before the Rajput states, and disintegration before the Maratha 
states. As for such states as Oudh and the Nizam's dominions, their 
very existence was bogus; they were kept in a semblance of life, 
only by means of the breath blown through them by the protect- 
ing power.'* 

Hyderabad, the premier state to-day, was small, in area to 
begin with. Its boundaries were extended twice, after Tipu Sultan's 
defeat by the British and the Maratha wars. These additions were 
at the instance of the British, and on the express stipulation that 
the Nizam was to function in a subordinate capacity to them. 
Indeed, on Tipu's defeat, the offer of part of his territory was first 
made to the Peshwa, the Maratha leader, but he refused to accept 
it on those conditions. 

Kashmir, the next largest state, was sold by the East India 
Company after the Sikh wars to the great-grandfather of the pre- 
sent ruler. It was subsequently taken under direct British control 
on a plea of misgovernment. Later the ruler's powers were restored 
to them. The present state of Mysore was created by the British 
after Tipu's wars. It was also under direct British rule for a lengthy 
period. 

The only truly independent kingdom in India is Nepal on the 
north-eastern frontier, which occupies a position analogous to that 
of Afghanistan, though it is rather isolated. All the rest came within 
the scope of what was called the 'subsidiary system,' under which 
all real power lay with the British Government, exercised through 
a resident or agent. Often even the ministers of the ruler were 
British officials imposed upon him. But the entire responsibility 
for good government and reform lay with the ruler, who with the 

*'The Making ofthe Indian Princes', Edward Thompson, pp. 270-1. In this book as well 
as Thompson's 'Life of Lord Metcalfe,' there are vivid pictures of Hyderabad and British 
control and graft there; also of Delhi and Ranjit Sing,\'s Punjab. The Butler Committee 
(1928-29), appointed by the British Government to consider the problem ofthe Indian States, 
said in its report: 'It is not in accordance with historical facts that when the Indian States 
came into contact with the British power they were independent. Some were rescued, others 
were created by the British. ' 

310 



best will in the world (and he usually lacked that will as well as 
competence) could do little in the circumstances. Henry Lawrence 
wrote in 1846 about the Indian states system: 'If there was a device 
for ensuring mal-government it is that of a native ruler and minister 
both relying on foreign bayonets, and directed by a British Resi- 
dent; even if all these were able, virtuous, and considerate, still 
the wheels of government could hardly move smoothly. If it be 
difficult to select one man, European or native, with all the requi- 
sites of a just administrator, where are three who can or will work 
together to be found? Each of the three may work incalculable 
mischief, but no one of them can do good if thwarted by the other.' 

Earlier still, in 1817, Sir Thomas Munro wrote to the Governor- 
General: 'There are many weighty objections to the employment 
of a subsidiary force. It has a natural tendency to render the govern- 
ment of every country in which it exists weak and oppressive, to 
extinguish all honourable spirit among the higher classes of society, 
and to degrade and impoverish the whole people. The usual remedy 
of a bad government in India is a quiet revolution in the palace, 
or a violent one by rebellion or foreign conquests. But the presence 
of a British force cuts off every chance of remedy, by supporting 
the prince on the throne against every foreign and domestic enemy. 
It renders him indolent, by teaching him to trust to strangers for 
his security, and cruel and avaricious, by showing him that he has 
nothing to fear from the hatred of his subjects. Wherever the subsi- 
diary system is introduced, unless the reigning prince be a man of 
great abilities, the country will soon bear the marks of it in decaying 

villages and decreasing population Even if the prince himself 

were disposed to adhere rigidly to the (British) alliance, there will 
always be some amongst his principal officers who will urge him 
to break it. As long as there remains in the country any high- 
minded independence, which seeks to throw off the control of 
strangers, such counsellors will be found. I have a better opinion 
of the natives of India than to think that this spirit will ever be 
completely extinguished; and I can therefore have no doubt that 
the subsidiary system must everywhere run its full course and 
destroy every government which it undertakes to protect.'* 

In spite of such protests the subsidiary Indian state system was 
built up, and it brought, inevitably, corruption .and tyranny in 
its train. The governments of these states were often bad enough, 
but, in any event, they were almost powerless; a few ofthe British 
residents or agents in these states, like Metcalfe, were honest and 
conscientious, but more often they were neither, and they exercised 
the harlot's privilege of having power without responsibility. 
Private English adventurers, secure in the knowledge of their race 
and of official backing, played havoc with the funds ofthe state. 
Some ofthe accounts of what took place in these states during the 

^Quoted by Edward Thompson in 'The Making of the Indian Princes' (1943). 

311 



first half of the nineteenth century, especially in Oudh and 
Hyderabad, are almost incredible. Oudh was annexed to British 
India a little before the Mutiny of 1857. 

British policy was then in favour of such annexations, and every 
pretext was taken advantage of for a 'lapse' of the state to British 
authority. But the Mutiny and great Revolt of 1857 demonstrated 
the value of the subsidiary state system to the British Government. 
Except for some minor defections the Indian princes not only 
remained aloof from the rising, but, in some instances, actually 
helped the British to crush it. This brought about a change in 
British policy towards them, and it was decided to keep them and 
even to strengthen them. 

The doctrine of British 'paramountcy' was proclaimed, and in 
practice the control of the political department of the Government 
of India over the states has been strict and continuous. Rulers 
have been removed or deprived of their powers; ministers have 
been imposed upon them from the British services. Quite a large 
number of such ministers are functioning now in the states, and 
they consider themselves answerable far more to British authority 
than to their nominal head, the prince. 

Some of the princes are good, some are bad; even the good ones 
are thwarted and checked at every turn. As a class they are of 
necessity backward, feudal in outlook, and authoritarian in 
methods, except in their dealings with the British Government, 
when they show a becoming subservience. Shelvankar has rightly 
called the Indian states 'Britain's fifth column in India.' 

Contradictions of British Rule in India 
Ram Mohan Roy. The Press 
Sir William Jones. English Education in Bengal 

One remarkable contradiction meets us at every turn in consider- 
ing the record of British rule in India. The British became dominant 
in India, and the foremost power in the world, because they were 
the heralds of the new big-machine industrial civilization. They 
represented a new historic force which was going to change the 
world, and were thus, unknown to themselves, the forerunners and 
representatives of change and revolution; and yet they deliberately 
tried to prevent change, except in so far as this was necessary to 
consolidate their position and help them in exploiting the country 
and its people to their own advantage. Their outlook and objectives 
were reactionary, partly because of the background of the social 
clgss that came here, but chiefly because of a deliberate desire to 
check changes in a progressive direction, as these might strengthen 
the Indian people and thus ultimately weaken the British hold 
on India. The fear of the people runs through all their thought and 
policy, for' they did not want to and could not merge with them, 

312 



and were destined to remain an isolated foreign ruling group, 
surrounded by an entirely different and hostile humanity. Changes, 
and some in a progressive direction, did came, but they came in 
spite of British policy, although their impetus was the impact of 
the new west through the British. 

Individual Englishmen, educationists, orientalists, journalists, 
missionaries, and others played an important part in bringing 
western culture to India, and in their attempts to do so often came 
into conflict with their own Government. That Government 
feared the effects of the spread of modern education and put many 
obstacles in its way, and yet it was due to the pioneering efforts 
of able and earnest Englishmen, who gathered enthusiastic groups 
of Indian students around them, that English thought and litera- 
ture and political tradition were introduced to India. (When I 
say Englishmen I include, of course, people from the whole of Great 
Britain and Ireland, though I know this is improper and incorrect. 
But I dislike the word Britisher, and even that probably does not 
include the Irish. My apologies to the Irish, the Scots, and the 
Welsh. In India they have all functioned alike and have been 
looked upon as one indistinguishable group.) Even the British 
Government, in spite of its dislike of education, was compelled by 
circumstances to arrange for the training and production of clerks 
for its growing establishment. It could not afford to bring out from 
England large numbers of people to serve in this subordinate capa- 
city. So education grew slowly and, though it was a limited and 
perverted education, it opened the doors and windows of the mind 
to new ideas and dynamic thoughts. 

The printing press and indeed all machinery were also consi- 
dered dangerous and explosive for the Indian mind, not to be 
encouraged in any way lest they led to the spread of sedition and 
industrial growth. There is a story that the Nizam of Hyderabad 
once expressed a desire to see European machinery and thereupon 
the British Resident procured for him an airpump and a printing 
press. The Nizam's momentary curiosity having been satisfied, 
these were stored away with other gifts and curiosities. But when 
the Government in Calcutta heard of this they expressed their 
displeasure to their Resident and rebuked him especially for intro- 
ducing a printing press in an Indian state. The Resident offered 
to get it broken up secretly if the Government so desired. 

But while private printing presses were not encouraged, Gov- 
ernment could not carry on its work without printing, and official 
presses were therefore started in Calcutta and Madras and elsewhere. 

The first private printing press was started by the Baptist 
missionaries in Serampore, and the first newspaper was started 
by an Englishman in Calcutta in 1780. 

All these and other like changes crept in gradually, influencing 
the Indian mind and giving rise to the 'modern' consciousness. 

313 



Only a small group was directly influenced by the thought of 
Europe, for India clung to her own philosophic background, 
considering it superior to that of the west. The real impact and 
influence of the west were on the practical side of life which was 
obviously superior to the eastern. The new techniques — the railway 
train, the printing press, other machinery, more efficient ways of 
warfare — could not be ignored, and these came up against old 
methods of thought almost unawares, by indirect approaches, 
creating a conflict in the mind of India. The most obvious and 
far-reaching change was the break-up of the agrarian system and 
the introduction of conceptions of private property and land- 
lordism. Money economy had crept in and 'land became a market- 
able commodity. What had once been held rigid by custom was 
dissolved by money.' 

Bengal witnessed and experienced all these agrarian, technical, 
educational, and intellectual changes long before any other consi- 
derable part of India, for Bengal had a clear half-century ofBritish 
rule before it spread over wider areas. During the second half of 
the eighteenth century and the first half of the nineteenth, Bengal 
therefore played a dominant role in British Indian life. Not only 
was Bengal the centre and heart of the British administration, but 
it also produced the first groups of English-educated Indians who 
spread out to other parts of India under the shadow of the British 
power. A number of very remarkable men rose in Bengal in the 
nineteenth century, who gave the lead to the rest of India in cultural 
and political matters, and out of whose efforts the new nationalist 
movement ultimately took shape. Bengal not only had a much 
longer acquaintance with British rule but it experienced it in its 
earliest phases when it was both harsher and more exuberant, 
more fluid and less set in rigid frames. It had accepted that rule, 
adapted itselfto it, long before northern and central India submitted. 
The great Revolt of 1857 had little effect on Bengal, although the 
first spark appeared accidentally at Barrackpore near Calcutta. 

Previous to British rule Bengal had been an outlying province 
of the Mughal Empire, important but still rather cut off from 
the centre. During the early mediasval period many debased forms 
of worship and of Tantric philosophy and practices had flourished 
among the Hindus there. Then came many Hindu reform move- 
ments affecting social customs and laws and even changing some- 
what the well-recognized rules of inheritance elsewhere. Chaitanya, 
a great scholar who became a man of faith and emotion, establish- 
ed a form of Vaishnavism, based on faith, and influenced greatly 
the people of Bengal. The Bengalis developed a curious mixture of 
high intellectual attainments and equally strong emotionalism. 
This tradition of loving faith and service of humanity was repre- 
sented in Bengal in the second half of the nineteenth century by 
another remarkable man of saintly character, Ramakrishna 

314 



Paramahansa; in his name an order of service was established which 
has an unequalled record in humanitarian relief and social work. 
Full of the ideal of the patient loving service of the Franciscans of 
old, and quiet unostentatious, efficient, rather like the Quakers, 
the members of the Ramakrishna Mission carry on their hospitals 
and educational establishments and engage in relief work, when- 
ever any calamity occurs, all over India and even outside. 

Ramakrishna represented the old Indian tradition. Before him, 
in the eighteenth century, another towering personality had risen 
in Bengal, Raja Ram Mohan Roy, who was a new type combining 
in himself the old learning and the new. Deeply versed in Indian 
thought and philosophy, a scholar in Sanskrit, Persian, and Arabic, 
he was a product of the mixed Hindu-Moslem culture that was 
then dominant among the cultured classes of India. The coming 
of the British to India and their superiority in many ways led his 
curious and adventurous mind to find out what their cultural roots 
were. He learnt English but this was not enough; he learnt Greek, 
Latin, and Hebrew also to discover the sources of the religion and 
culture of the west. He was also attracted by science and the techni- 
cal aspects of western civilization, though at that time these 
technical changes were not so obvious as they subsequently became. 
Being of a philosophical and scholarly bent, Ram Mohan Roy 
inevitably went to the older literatures. Describing him, Monier- 
Williams, the Orientalist, has said that he was 'perhaps the first 
earnest-minded investigator of the science of Comparative Reli- 
gion that the world has produced'; and yet, at the same time, he 
was anxious to modernize education and take it out of the grip of 
the old scholasticism. Even in those early days he was in favour of 
the scientific method, and he wrote to the Governor-General 
emphasizing the need for education in 'mathematics, natural 
philosophy, chemistry, anatomy, and other useful sciences.' 

He was more than a scholar and an investigator; he was a 
reformer above all. Influenced in his early days by Islam and 
later, to some extent, by Christianity, he stuck nevertheless to 
the foundations of his own faith. But he tried to reform that faith 
and rid it of abuses and the evil practices that had become asso- 
ciated with it. It was largely because of his agitation for the 
abolition of suttee that the British Government prohibited it. This 
suttee, or the immolation of women on the funeral pyre of their 
husbands, was never widespread. But rare instances continued to 
occur among the upper classes. Probably the practice was brought 
to India originally by the Scytho-Tartars, among whom the custom 
prevailed of vassals and liegemen killing themselves on the death 
of their lord. In early Sanskrit literature the suttee custom is de- 
nounced. Akbar tried hard to stop it, and the Marathas also were 
opposed to it. 

Ram Mohan Roy was one of the founders of the Indian press. 

315 



From 1780 onwards a number of newspapers had been published 
by Englishmen in India. These were usually very critical of the 
Government and led to conflict and the establishment of a strict 
censorship. Among the earliest champions of the freedom of the 
press in India were Englishmen and one of them, James Silk Buck- 
ingham, who is still remembered, was deported from the country. 
The first Indian owned and edited newspaper was issued (in 
English) in 1818, and in the same year the Baptist missionaries of 
Serampore brought out a Bengali monthly and a weekly, the first 
periodicals published in an Indian language. Newspapers and 
periodicals in English and the Indian languages followed in quick 
succession in Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay. 

Meanwhile the struggle for a free press had already begun, to 
continue with many ups and downs till to-day. The year 1818 
also saw the birth of the famous Regulation III, which provided 
for the first time for detention without trial. This regulation is still 
in force to-day, and a number of people are kept in prison under 
this 126-year-old decree. 

Ram Mohan Roy was associated with several newspapers. He 
brought out a bi-lingual, Bengali-English magazine, and later, 
desiring an all-India circulation, he published a weekly in Persian, 
which was recognized then as the language of the cultured classes 
all over India. But this came to grief soon after the enactment 
in 1823 of new measures for the control of the press. Ram Mohan 
and others protested vigorously against these measures and even 
addressed a petition to the King-in-Council in England. 

Ram Mohan Roy's journalist activities were intimately con- 
nected with his reform movements. His synthetic and universalist 
points of view were resented by orthodox sections who also opposed 
many of the reforms he advocated. But he also had staunch sup- 
porters, among them the Tagore family which played an outstand- 
ing part later in the renaissance in Bengal. Ram Mohan went to 
England on behalf of the Delhi Emperor and died in Bristol in 
the early thirties of the nineteenth century. 

Ram Mohan Roy and others studied English privately. There 
were no English schools or colleges outside Calcutta and the 
Government's policy was definitely opposed to the teaching of 
English to Indians. In 1781, the Calcutta Madrasa was started by 
the Government in Calcutta for Arabic studies. In 1817, a group 
of Indians and Europeans started the Hindu College in Calcutta, 
now called the Presidency College. In 1791, a Sanskrit College 
was started in Benares. Probably in the second decade of the 
nineteenth century some missionary schools were teaching English. 
During the twenties a school ofthought arose in government circles 
in favour of the teaching of English, but this was opposed. How- 
ever, as an experimental measure some English classes were 
attached to the Arabic school in Delhi and to some institutions in 

316 



Calcutta. The final decision in favour of the teaching of English 
was embodied in Macaulay's Minute on Education of February, 
1835. In 1857, the Universities of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay 
began their career. 

If the British Government in India was reluctant to teach English 
to Indians, Brahmin scholars objected even more, but for different 
reasons, to teach Sanskrit to Englishmen. When Sir William Jones, 
already a linguist and a scholar, came to India as a judge of the 
Supreme Court, he expressed his desire to learn Sanskrit. But no 
Brahmin would agree to teach the sacred language to a foreigner 
and an intruder, even though handsome rewards were offered. 
Jones ultimately, with considerable difficulty, got hold of a non- 
Brahmin Vaidya or medical practitioner who agreed to teach, 
but on his own peculiar and stringent conditions. Jones agreed to 
every stipulation, so great was his eagerness to learn the ancient 
language of India. Sanskrit fascinated him and especially the 
discovery of the old Indian drama. It was through his writings and 
translations that Europe first had a glimpse of some of the treasures 
of Sanskrit literature. In 1784 Sir William Jones established the 
Bengal Asiatic Society which later became the Royal Asiatic Society. 
To Jones, and to the many other European scholars, India owes 
a deep debt of gratitude for the rediscovery of her past literature. 
Much of it was known of course throughout every age, but the 
knowledge had become more and more confined to select and 
exclusive groups, and the dominance of Persian, as the language 
of culture, had diverted people's minds frpm it. The search for 
manuscripts brought out many a little-known work and the appli- 
cation of modern critical methods of scholarship gave a new back- 
ground to the vast literature that was revealed. 

The advent and use of the printing press gave a great stimulus 
to the development of the popular Indian languages. Some of 
these languages — Hindi, Bengali, Gujrati, Marathi, Urdu, Tamil, 
Telugu — had not only long been in use, but had also developed 
literatures. Many of the books in them were widely known among 
the masses. Almost always these books were epic in form, poems, 
or collection of songs and verses, which could easily be memorized. 
There was practically no prose literature in them at the time. 
Serious writing was almost confined to Sanskrit and Persian, and 
every cultured person was supposed to know one of them. These 
two classical languages played a dominating role and prevented 
the growth of the popular provincial languages. The printing of 
books and newspapers broke the hold of the classics and imme- 
diately prose literatures in the provincial languages began to 
develop. The early Christian missionaries, especially of the Baptist 
mission at Serampore, helped in this process greatly. The 
first private printing presses were set up by them and their 
efforts to translate the Bible into prose versions of the Indian 

317 



languages met with considerable success. 

There was no difficulty in dealing with the well-known and 
established languages, but the missionaries went further and 
tackled some of the minor and undeveloped languages and gave 
them shape and form, compiling grammars and dictionaries for 
them. They even laboured at the dialects of the primitive hill and 
forest tribes and reduced them to writing. The desire of the Christ- 
ian missionaries to translate the Bible into every possible language 
thus resulted in the development ofmany Indian languages. Christ- 
ian mission work in India has not always been admirable or praise- 
worthy, but in this respect, as well as in the collection of folklore, 
it has undoubtedly been of great service to India. 

The reluctance of the East India Company to spread education 
was justified, for as early as 1830 a batch of students ofthe Hindu 
College of Calcutta (where Sanskrit and English were taught) 
demanded certain reforms. They asked for restrictions on the 
political power ofthe company and provision for free and compul- 
sory education. Free education was well-known in India from the 
most ahcient times. That education was traditional, not very good 
or profitable, but it was available to poor students without any 
payment, except some personal service to the teacher. In this 
respect both the Hindu and Moslem traditions were similar. 

While the new education was deliberately prevented from 
spreading, the old education had been largely liquidated in Bengal. 
When the British seized power in Bengal there were a very large 
number of muafis, that is tax-free grants of land. Many of these 
were personal, but most were in the shape of endowments for 
educational institutions. A vast number of elementary schools of 
the old type subsisted on them, as well as some institutions for 
higher education, which was chiefly imparted in Persian. The 
East India Company was anxious to make money rapidly in order 
to pay dividends to its shareholders in England, and the demands 
of its directors were continuous and pressing. A deliberate policy 
was therefore adopted to resume and confiscate these muafi lands. 
Strict proof was demanded of the original grant, but the old 
sanads and papers had long been lost or eaten up by termites; 
so the muafis were resumed and the old holders were ejected, and 
the schools and colleges lost their endowments. Huge areas were 
involved in this way and many old families were ruined. The 
educational establishments, which had been supported by these 
muafis, ceased to function, and a vast number of teachers and others 
connected with them were thrown out of employment. 

This process helped in ruining the old feudal classes in Bengal, 
both Moslem and Hindu, as well as those classes who were depen- 
dent on them. Moslems were especially affected as they were, as 
a group, more feudal than the Hindus and were also the chief 
beneficiaries ofthe muafis. Among the Hindus there were far larger 

318 



numbers of middle class people engaged in trade and commerce 

and the professions. These people were more adaptable and took 

to English education more readily. They were also more useful to 

the British for their subordinate services. Moslems avoided 

English education and, in Bengal, they were not looked upon with 

favour by the British rulers, who were afraid that the remnants 

of the old ruling class might give trouble. Bengali Hindus thus 

acquired almost a monopoly in the beginning in the subordinate 

government service and were sent to the northern provinces. A few 

Moslems, relics of the old families, were later taken into this service. 

English education brought a widening of the Indian horizon, 

an admiration for English literature and institutions, a revolt 

against some customs and aspects of Indian life, and a growing 

demand for political reform, The new professional classes took 

the lead in political agitation, which consisted chiefly in sending 

representations to Government. English-educated people in the 

professions and the services formed in effect a new class, which 

was to grow all over India, a class influenced by western thought 

and ways and rather cut off from the mass of the population. In 

1852 the British Indian Association was started in Calcutta. This 

was one of the forerunners of the Indian National Congress, and yet 

a whole generation was to pass before the Congress was started 

in 1885. This gap represents the period of the Revolt of 1857-58, 

its suppression and its consequences. The great difference between 

the state of Bengal and that of northern and central India in the 

middle of the century is brought out by the fact that while in 

Bengal the new intelligentsia (chiefly Hindu) had been influenced 

by English thought and literature and looked to England for 

political constitutional reform, the other areas were seething with 

the spirit of revolt. 

In Bengal one can see more clearly than elsewhere the early 
effects of British rule and western influence. The break-up of 
I-- the agrarian economy was complete and the old feudal classes 
had almost been eliminated. In their place had come new land- 
owners whose organic and traditional contacts with the land 
were far less, and who had few of the virtues and most of the 
failings of the old feudal landlords. The peasantry suffered 
famine and spoliation in many ways and were reduced to extreme 
poverty. The artisan class was almost wiped-out. Over these 
disjointed and broken-up foundations rose new groups and classes, 
the products of British rule and connected with it in many ways. 
There were the merchants who were really middlemen of British 
trade and industry, profiting by the leavings of that industry. 
There were also the English-educated classes in the subordinate 
services and the learned professions, both looking to the British 
power for advancement and both influenced in varying degrees by 
western thought. Among these grew up a spirit of revolt against 

319 



the rigid conventions and social framework of Hindu society. 
They looked to English liberalism and institutions for inspiration. 

This was the effect on the upper fringe ofthe Hindus ofBengal. 
The mass ofthe Hindus there were not directly affected and even 
the Hindu leaders probably seldom thought of the masses. The 
Moslems were not affected at all, some individuals apart, and 
they kept deliberately aloof from the new education. They had 
been previously backward economically and they became even 
more so. The nineteenth century produced a galaxy of brilliant 
Hindus in Bengal, and yet there is hardly a single Moslem Bengali 
leader of any note who stands out there during this period. So 
far as the masses were concerned there was hardly any appreciable 
difference between the Hindus and Moslems; they were indisting- 
uishable in habits, ways of living, language, and in their common 
poverty and misery. Indeed, nowhere in India were the religious 
and other differences between Hindus, and Moslems of all classes 
so little marked as in Bengal. Probably 98 per cent ofthe Moslems 
were converts from Hinduism, usually from the lowest strata of 
society. In population figures there was probably a slight majority 
of Moslems over Hindus. (To-day the proportions in Bengal are: 
53 per cent Moslems, 46 per cent Hindus, 1 per cent others.) 

All these early consequences of the British connection, and the 
various economic, social, intellectual, and political movements 
that they gave rise to in Bengal, are noticeable elsewhere in India, 
but in lesser and varying degrees. The break-up ofthe old feudal 
order and economy was less complete and more gradual elsewhere. 
In fact that order rose in rebellion and even when crushed, survived 
to some extent. The Moslems in upper India were culturally 
and economically far superior to their co-religionists ofBengal, but 
even they kept aloof from western education. 

The Hindus took to this education more easily and were more 
influenced by western ideas. The subordinate Government services 
and the professions had far more Hindus than Moslems. Onl 
in the Punjab this difference was less marked. 

The Revolt of 1857-58 flared up and was crushed, but Bengal 
was hardly touched by it. Throughout the nineteenth century 
the new English-educated class, mainly Hindu, looked up with 
admiration towards England and hoped to advance with her 
help and in co-operation with her. There was a cultural renais- 
sance and a remarkable growth of the Bengali language, and 
the leaders of Bengal stood out as the leaders of political India. 

Some glimpse of that faith in England which filled the mind of 
Bengal in those days, as well as ofthe revolt against old-established 
social codes, may be had from that moving message ofRabindranath 
Tagore, which he gave on his eightieth birth-day (May, 1941), 
a few months before his death. 'As I look back,' he says, 'on the 
vast stretch of years that lie behind me and see in clear perspective 

320 



the history of my early development, I am struck by the change 
that has taken place both in my own attitude and in the psychology 
of my countrymen — a change that carries within it a cause of 
profound tragedy. 

'Our direct contact with the larger world of men was linked 
up with the contemporary history of the English people whom 
we came to know in those earlier days. It was mainly through 
their mighty literature that we formed our ideas with regard to 
these newcomers to our Indian shores. In those days the type of 
learning that was served out to us was neither plentiful nor 
diverse, nor was the spirit of scientific inquiry very much in 
evidence. Thus their scope being strictly limited, the educated 
of those days had recourse to English language and literature. 
Their days and nights were eloquent with the stately declama- 
tions of Burke, with Macaulay's long-rolling sentences; discus- 
sions centred upon Shakespeare's drama and Byron's poetry and 
above all upon the large-hearted liberalism of the nineteenth 
century English politics. 

'At the time though tentative attempts were being made to 
gain our national independence, at heart we had not lost faith 
in the generosity of the English race. This belief was so firmly 
rooted in the sentiments of our leaders as to lead them to hope 
that the victor would of his own grace pave the path to freedom 
for the vanquished. This belief was based upon the fact that 
England at the time provided a shelter to all those who had to 
flee from persecution in their own country. Political martyrs 
who had suffered for the honour of their people were accorded 
unreserved welcome at the hands of the English. I was impressed 
by this evidence of liberal humanity in the character of the 
English and thus I was led to set them on the pedestal of my 
highest respect. This generosity in their national character had 
not yet been vitiated by imperialist pride. About this time, as a 
boy in England, I had the opportunity of listening to the speeches 
ofJohn Bright, both in and outside Parliament. The large-hearted 
radical liberalism of those speeches, overflowing all narrow national 
bounds, had made so deep an impression on my mind that some- 
thing of it lingers even to-day, even in these days of graceless 
disillusionment. 

'Certainly that spirit of abject dependence upon the charity 
of our rulers was no matter of pride. What was remarkable, 
however, was the whole-hearted way in which we gave our re- 
cognition to human greatness even when it revealed itself in 
the foreigner. The best and noblest gifts of humanity cannot be 
the monopoly of a particular race or country; its scope may 
not be limited nor may it be regarded as the miser's hoard 
buried underground. That is why English literature which 
nourished our minds in the past, does even now convey its deep 

321 



resonance to the recesses of our heart.' 

Tagore proceeds to refer to the Indian ideal of proper con- 
duct prescribed by the tradition of the race. 'Narrow in them 
selves these time-honoured social conventions originated an 
held good in a circumscribed geographical area, in that strip o 
land, Brahmavarta by name, bound on either side by the rivers 
Saraswati and Drisadvati. That is how a pharisaic formalism 
gradually got the upper hand of free thought and the idea "proper 
conduct" which Manu found established in Brahmavarta steadily 
degenerated into socialized tyranny. 

'During my boyhood days the attitude of the cultured and 
educated section of Bengal, nurtured on English learning, was 
charged with a feeling of revolt against these rigid regulations 
of society. . . .In place of these set codes of conduct we accepted 
the ideal of "civilization" as represented by the English term. 

'In our own family this change of spirit was welcomed for the 
sake of its sheer rational and moral force and its influence was 
felt in every sphere of our life. Born in that atmosphere, which 
was moreover coloured by our intuitive bias for literature, I 
naturally set the English on the throne of my heart. Thus passed 
the first chapters of my life. Then came the parting of ways, 
accompanied with a painful feeling of disillusion, when I began 
increasingly to discover how easily those who accepted the 
highest truths of civilization disowned them with impunity 
whenever questions of national self-interest were involved.' 

The Great Revolt of 1857. Racialism 

After nearly a century of British rule, Bengal had accommo- 
dated itself to it; the peasantry devastated by famine and crushed 
by new economic burdens, the new intelligentsia looking to the 
west and hoping that progress would come through English 
liberalism. So also, more or less in the south and in western 
India, in Madras and Bombay. But in the upper provinces there 
was no such submission or accommodation and the spirit of 
revolt was growing, especially among the feudal chiefs and their 
followers. Even in the masses discontent and an intense anti- 
British feeling were widespread. The upper classes keenly resented 
the insulting and overbearing manners ofthe foreigners, the people 
generally suffered from the rapacity and ignorance ofthe officials 
of the East India Company, who ignored their time-honoured 
customs and paid no heed to what the people of the country 
thought. Absolute power over vast numbers of people had turned 
their heads and they suffered no check or hindrance. Even the 
new judicial system they introduced became a thing of terror 
because ofits complications and the ignorance of thejudges of both 
the language and customs of the country. 

322 



As early as 1817, Sir Thomas Munro, writing to the Gover- 
j nor-General, Lord Hastings, after pointing out the advantages 

of British rule, said: 'but these advantages are dearly bought. 
I They are purchased by the sacrifice of independence, of national 

character, and of whatever renders a people respectable The 

1 consequence, therefore, of the conquest of India by the British 

arms would be, in place of raising, to debase a whole people. 
I There is perhaps no example of any conquest in which the natives 

have been so completely excluded from all share of the government 
| of their country as in British India.' 

Munro was pleading for the employment of Indians in the 
administration. A year later he wrote again: 'Foreign con- 
querors have treated the natives with violence, and often with 
great cruelty, but none has treated them with so much scorn 
I as we; none has stigmatized the whole people as unworthy of 
trust, as incapable of honesty, and as fit to be employed only 
j where we cannot do without them. It seems to be not only 
ungenerous, but impolitic, to debase the character of a people 
I fallen under our dominion.'* 

British dominion was extended to the Punjab by 1850 after 

two Sikh wars. Maharaja Ranjit Singh, who had held and 

I extended the Sikh state in the Punjab, had died in 1839. In 1856 

Oudh was annexed. Oudh had been virtually under British rule 

1 for half a century, for it was a vassal state, its nominal ruler being 

both helpless and degenerate, and the British Resident all-powerful. 

It had sunk to the very depths of misery and illustrated all the 

I evils of the subsidiary state system. 

In May, 1857, the Indian army at Meerut mutinied. The 
I revolt had been secretly and well organized but a premature 
[outburst rather upset the plans of the leaders. It was much 
more than a military mutiny and it spread rapidly and assumed 
the character of a popular rebellion and a war of Indian indepen- 
dence. As such a popular rebellion of the masses it was confined 
I to Delhi, the United Provinces (as they are now called), and parts 
I of central India and Bihar. Essentially it was a feudal outburst, 
[headed by feudal chiefs and their followers and aided by the 
[widespread anti-foreign sentiment. Inevitably it looked up to 
[the relic of the Mughal dynasty, still sitting in the Delhi palace, 
I but feeble and old and powerless. Both Hindus and Moslems took 
1 full part in the Revolt. 

This Revolt strained British rule to the utmost and it was ult- 
imately suppressed with Indian help. It brought out all the 
linherent weaknesses of the old regime, which was making its 
[last despairing effort to drive out foreign rule. The feudal chiefs 
Ihad the sympathy of the masses over large areas, but they were 
|incapable, unorganized and with no constructive ideal or com- 

*Quoted by Edward Thompson in 'The Making of the Indian Princes' (1943). 

323 



munity of interest. They had already played their role in history 
and there was no place for them in the future. Many of their 
number, in spite of their sympathies, thought discretion the 
better part of valour, and stood apart waiting to see on which 
side victory lay. Many played the part of quislings. The Indian 
princes as a whole kept aloof or helped the British, fearing to 
risk what they had acquired or managed to retain. There was 
hardly any national and unifying sentiment among the leaders 
and a mere anti-foreign feeling, coupled with a desire to maintain 
their feudal privileges, was a poor substitute for this. 

The British got the support of the Gurkhas and, what is much 
more surprising, of the Sikhs also, for the Sikhs had been their 
enemies and had been defeated by them only a few years before. 
It is certainly to the credit of the British that they could win over 
the Sikhs in this way; whether it is to the credit or discredit of j 
the Sikhs of those days depends upon one's point of view. It is clear, 
however, that there was a lack of nationalist feeling which might 
have bound the people of India together. Nationalism of the 
modern type was yet to come; India had still to go through much 
sorrow and travail before she learnt the lesson which would give 
her real freedom. Not by fighting for a lost cause, the feudal order, 
would freedom come. 

The Revolt threw up some fine guerrilla leaders. Feroz Shah, 
a relative of Bahadur Shah, of Delhi, was one of them, but, most I 
brilliant of all was Tantia Topi who harassed the British for | 
many months even when defeat stared him in the face. Ulti- 
mately when he crossed the Narbada river into the Maratha I 
regions, hoping to receive aid and welcome from his own people, 
there was no welcome, and he was betrayed. One name stands 
out above others and is revered still in popular memory, the! 
name of Lakshmi Bai, Rani ofjhansi, a girl of twenty years ofl 
age, who died fighting. 'Best and bravest' of the rebel leaders, | 
she was called by the English general who opposed her. 

British memorials of the Mutiny have been put up in Cawn-| 
pore and elsewhere. There is no memorial for the Indians whoj 
died. The rebel Indians sometimes indulged in cruel and bar-J 
barous behaviour; they were unorganized, suppressed, and oftenj 
angered by reports of British excesses. But there is another side] 
to the picture also that impressed itself on the mind of India,! 
and in my own province especially the memory of it persists in] 
town and village. One would like to forget all this, for it is 
ghastly and horrible picture showing man at his worst,, evenl 
according to the new standards of barbarity set up by nazisml 
and modern war. But it can only be forgotten, or remembered! 
in a detached impersonal way, when it becomes truly the past! 
with nothing to connect it with the present. So long as the! 
connecting links and reminders are present, and the spirit behind! 

324 



those events survives and shows itself, that memory also will 
endure and influence our people. Attempts to suppress that 
picture do not destroy it but drive it deeper in the mind. Only 
by dealing with it normally can its effect be lessened. 

A great deal of false and perverted history has been written 
about the Revolt and its suppression. What the Indians think 
about it seldom finds its way to the printed page. Savarkar 
wrote 'The History of the War of Indian Independence' some 
thirty years ago, but his book was promptly banned and is 
banned still. Some frank and honourable English historians have 
occasionally lifted the veil and allowed us a glimpse of the race 
mania and lynching mentality which prevailed on an enormous 
scale. The accounts given in Kaye and Malleson's 'History of 
the Mutiny' and in Thompson and Garrett's 'Rise and Fulfilment 
of British Rule in India' make one sick with horror. 'Every Indian 
who was not actually fighting for the British became a "murderer 
of women and children"... a general massacre of the inhabitants 
of Delhi, a large number of whom were known to wish us success, 
was openly proclaimed.' The days of Timur and Nadir Shah 
were remembered, but their exploits were eclipsed by the new 
terror, both in extent and the length of time it lasted. Looting 
was officially allowed for a week, but it actually lasted for a month, 
and it was accompanied by wholesale massacre. 

In my own city and district of Allahabad and in the neigh- 
bourhood, General Neill held his 'Bloody Assizes.' 'Soldiers and 
civilians alike were holding Bloody Assize, or slaying natives 
without any assize at all, regardless of age or sex. It is on the 
records of our British Parliament, in papers sent home by the 
Governor-General in Council, that "the aged, women, and 
children are sacrificed as well as those guilty of rebellion." They 
were not deliberately hanged, but burnt to death in villages — 
perhaps now and then accidentally shot.' 'Volunteer hanging 
parties went into the districts and amateur executioners were not 
wanting to the occasion. One gentleman boasted of the numbers 
he had finished off quite "in an artistic manner," with mango 
trees as gibbets and elephants for drops, the victims of this wild 
justice being strung up, as though for pastime, in the form of figures 
of eight.' And so in Cawnpore and Lucknow and all over the place. 

It is hateful to have to refer to this past history, but the spirit 
behind those events did not end with them. It survived, and 
whenever a crisis comes or nerves give way, it is in evidence again. 
The world knows about Amritsar and Jallianwala Bagh, but it 
does not know of much that has happened since the days of the 
Mutiny, much that has taken place even in recent years and in 
our time, which has embittered the present generation. Imperia- 
lism and the domination of one people over another is bad, and 
so is racialism. But imperialism plus racialism can only lead to 

325 



horror and ultimately to the degradation of all concerned with 
them. The future historians of England will have to consider how 
far England's decline from her proud eminence was due to her 
imperialism and racialism, which corrupted her public life and 
made her forget the lessons of her own history and literature. 

Since Hitler emerged from obscurity and became the Fuehrer 
of Germany, we have heard a great deal about racialism and 
the nazi theory of the herrenvolk. That doctrine has been con- 
demned and is to-day condemned by the leaders of the United 
Nations. Biologists tell us that racialism is a myth and there 
is no such thing as a master race. But we in India have known 
racialism in all its forms ever since the commencement of British 
rule. The whole ideology of this rule was that of the herrenvolk 
and the master race, and the structure of government was based 
upon it; indeed the idea of a master race is inherent in imperialism. 
There was no subterfuge about it; it was proclaimed in unambiguous 
language by those in authority. More powerful than words was 
the practice that accompanied them and, generation after genera- 
tion and year after year, India as a nation and Indians as indivi- 
duals were subjected to insult, humiliation, and contemptuous 
treatment. The English were an imperial race, we were told, 
with the god-given right to govern us and keep us in subjection; 
if we protested we were reminded of the 'tiger qualities of an 
imperial race.' As an Indian, I am ashamed to write all this, for 
the memory of it hurts, and what hurts still more is the fact that 
we submitted for so long to this degradation. I would have preferred 
any kind of resistance to this, whatever the consequences, rather 
than that our people should endure this treatment. And yet it 
is better that both Indians and Englishmen should know it, for 
that is the psychological background of England's connection 
with India, and psychology counts and racial memories are long. 

One rather typical quotation will make us realize how most 
of A the English in India have felt and acted. At the time of the 
Ilbert Bill agitation in 1883, Seton Kerr, who had been Foreign 
Secretary to the Government of India, declared that this Bill 
outraged 'the cherished conviction which was shared by every 
Englishman in India, from the highest to the lowest, by the 
planter's assistant in his lowly bungalow and by the editor in 
the full light of the Presidency town — from those to the Chief 
Commissioner in charge of an important province and to the 
Viceroy on his throne — the conviction in every man that he 
belongs to a race whom God has destined to govern and subdue.'* 



* Quoted in 'Rise and Fulfilment of British Rule in India', Edward Thompson and G. T. 
Garrett (London, 1935). 

326 



The Techniques of British Rule: Balance and 
Counterpoise 

The Revolt of 1857-58 was essentially a feudal rising, though 
there were some nationalistic elements in it. Yet, at the same 
time, it was due to the abstention or active help of the princes 
and other feudal chiefs that the British succeeded in crushing 
it. Those who had joined the Revolt were as a rule the dis- 
inherited and those deprived of their power and privileges by 
the British authority, or those who feared that some such fate 
was in store for them. British policy after some hesitation had 
decided in favour of a gradual elimination of the princes and 
the establishment of direct British rule. The Revolt brought 
about a change in this policy in favour not only of the princes 
but of the taluqdars or big landlords. It was felt that it was 
easier to control the masses through these feudal or semi-feudal 
chiefs. These taluqdars of Oudh had been the tax-farmers of the 
Mughals but, owing to the weakness of the central authority, 
they had begun to function as feudal landlords. Nearly all of 
them joined the Revolt, though some took care to keep a way 
of escape open. In spite of their rebellion the British authority 
offered to reinstate them (with a few exceptions) and confirm 
them in their estates on conditions of 'loyalty and good service.' 
Thus these taluqdars, who take pride in calling themselves the 
'Barons of Oudh,' became one of the pillars of British rule. 

Though the Revolt had directly affected only certain parts 
of the country, it had shaken up the whole of India and, parti- 
cularly, the British administration. The Government set about 
reorganizing their entire system; the British Crown, that is the 
Parliament, took over the country from the East India Company; 
the Indian army, which had begun the Revolt by its mutiny, 
was organized afresh. The techniques of British rule, which 
had already been well-established, were now clarified and con- 
firmed and deliberately acted upon. Essentially these were: the 
creation and protection of vested interests bound up with British 
rule; a policy of balancing and counterpoise of different elements, 
and the encouragement of fissiparous tendencies and division 
amongst them. 

The princes and the big landlords were the basic vested interests 
thus created and encouraged; but now a new class, even more tied 
up with British rule, grew in importance. This consisted of the 
Indian members of the services, usually in subordinate positions. 
Previously the employment of Indians had been avoided except 
when this could not be helped, and Munro had pleaded for such 
employment. Experience had now demonstrated that Indians 
employed were so dependent on the British administration and 
rule that they could be relied upon and treated as agents of that 

327 



rule. In the pre-mutiny days most of the Indian members of the 
subordinate services had been Bengalis. These had spread out 
over the upper provinces wherever the British administration 
needed clerks and the like in its civil or military establishments. 
Regular colonies of Bengalis had thus grown up at the administra- 
tive or military centres in the United Provinces, Delhi, and even 
in the Punjab. These Bengalis accompanied the British armies 
and proved faithful employees to them. They became associated 
in the minds of the rebels with Lhe British power and were greatly 
disliked by them and given uncomplimentary titles. 

Thus began the process of the Indianization of the adminis- 
trative machine in its subordinate ranks, all real power and 
initiative being, however, concentrated in the hands of the 
English personnel. As English education spread, the Bengalis 
had no longer a virtual monopoly of service and other Indians 
came in, both on thejudicial and executive sides of the administra- 
tion. This Indianization became the most effective method of 
strengthening British rule. It created a civil army and garrison 
everywhere, which was more important even than the military army 
of occupation. There were some members of this civil army who 
were able and patriotic and nationalistically inclined, but like the 
soldier, who also may be patriotic in his individual capacity, they 
were bound up by the army code and discipline, and the price of 
disobedience, desertion, and revolt was heavy. Not only was this 
civil army created but the hope and prospect of employment in it 
affected and demoralized a vast and growing number of others. 
There was a measure of prestige and security in it and a pension 
at the end of the term of service, and if a sufficient subservience 
was shown to one's superior officers, other failings did not count. 
These civil ertiployees were the intermediaries between the British 
authorities and the people, and if they had to be obsequious to their 
superiors they could be arrogant to and exact obedience from 
their own inferiors and the people at large. 

The lack of other avenues of employment, other ways of making 
a living, added, additional importance to government service. A 
few could become lawyers or doctors, but even so, success was by 
no means assured. Industry hardly existed. Trade was largely 
in the hands of certain hereditary classes who had a peculiar 
aptitude for it and who helped each other. The new education 
did not fit anyone for trade or industry; its chief aim was government 
service. Education was so limited as to offer few openings for a 
professional career; oth A r social services were almost non-existent. 
So government service remained and, as the colleges poured out 
their graduates; even the growing government services could not 
absorb them all, and a fierce competition arose. The unemployed 
graduates and others formed a pool from which government could 
always draw; they were a potential threat to the security of even 

328 



the employed. Thus the British Government in India became, 
not only the biggest employer, but, for all practical purposes, 
the sole big employer (including railways), and a vast bureaucratic 
machine was built up, strictly managed and controlled at the top. 
This enormous patronage was exercised to strengthen the British 
hold on the country, to crush discordant and disagreeable ele- 
ments, and to promote rivalry and discord amongst various 
groups anxiously looking forward to employment in govern- 
ment service. It led to demoralization and conflict, and the 
government could play one group against the other. 

The policy of balance and counterpoise was deliberately 
furthered in the Indian army. Various groups were so arranged 
as to prevent any sentiment of national unity growing up amongst 
them, and tribal and communal loyalties and slogans were 
encouraged. Every effort was made to isolate the army from the 
people and even ordinary newspapers were not allowed to reach 
the Indian troops. All the key positions were kept in the hands 
of Englishmen and no Indian could hold the King's commission. 
A raw English subaltern was senior to the oldest and most experien- 
ced Indian non-commissioned officer or those holding the so-called 
Viceroy's commissions. No Indian could be employed at army 
headquarters except as a petty clerk in the accounts department. 
For additional protection the more effective weapons of warfare 
were not given to the Indian forces; they were reserved for the 
British troops in India. These British troops were always kept with 
the Indian regiments in all the vital centres of India to serve as 
'Internal Security Troops' for suppression of disorder and to 
overawe the people. While this internal army, with a predomi- 
nance of British personnel, served as an army of occupation for 
the country, the greater portion of the Indian troops were part of 
the field army organized for service abroad. The Indian troops 
were recruited from special classes only, chiefly in northern India, 
which were called martial classes. 

Again we notice in India that inherent contradiction in British 
rule. Having brought about the political unification of the country 
and thus let loose new dynamic forces which thought not only in 
terms of that unity, but aimed at the freedom of India, the British 
Government tried to disrupt that very unity it had helped to create. 
That disruption was not thought of in political terms then as a 
splitting up of India; it was aimed at the weakening of nationalist 
elements so that Briiish rule might continue over the whole country. 
But it was nonetheless an attempt at disruption, by giving greater 
importance to the Indian states than they had ever had before, by 
encouraging reactionary elements and looking to them for sup- 
port, by promoting divisions and encouraging one group against 
another, by encouraging fissiparous tendencies due to religion 
or province, and by organizing quisling classes which were afraid 

329 



of a change which might engulf them. All this was a natural 
understandable policy for a foreign imperialist power to pursue, 
and it is a little naive to be surprised at it, harmful from the Indian 
nationalist point of view though it was. But the fact that it was so 
must be remembered if we are to understand subsequent develop- 
ments. Out of this policy arose those 'important elements in 
India's national life' of which we are reminded so often to-day; 
which were created and encouraged to disagree and disrupt, and 
are now called upon to agree among themselves. 

Because of this natural alliance of the British power with the 
reactionaries in India, it became the guardian and upholder 
of many an evil custom and practice which it otherwise con- 
demned. India was custom-ridden when the British came, and 
the tyranny of old custom is often a terrible thing. Yet customs 
change and are forced to adapt themselves to some extent to 
a changing environment. Hindu law was largely custom, and 
as custom changed the law also was applied in a different way. 
Indeed, there was no provision of Hindu law which could not 
be changed by custom. The British replaced this elastic custo- 
mary law by judicial decisions based on the old texts, and these 
decisions became precedents which had to be rigidly followed. 
That was, in theory, an advantage, as it produced greater unifor- 
mity and certainty. But, in the manner it was done, it resulted in 
the perpetuation of the ancient law unmodified by subsequent 
customs. Thus the old law which, in some particulars and in 
various places, had been changed by custom and was thus out of 
date, was petrified, and every tendency to change it in the well- 
known customary way was suppressed. It was still open to a group 
to prove a custom overriding the law, but this was extraordinarily 
difficult in the law courts. Change could only come by positive 
legislation, but the British Government, which was the legislating 
authority, had no wish to antagonize the conservative elements on 
whose support it counted. When later some legislative powers 
were given to partially elected assemblies, every attempt to pro- 
mote social reform legislation was frowned upon by the authorities 
and sternly discouraged. 

Growth of Industry: Provincial Differences 

Slowly India recovered from the after-effects of the revolt of 
1857-58. Despite British policy, powerful forces were at work 
changing India, and a new social consciousness was arising. The 
political unity of India, contact with the west, technological 
advances, and even the misfortune of a common subjection, led 
to new currents of thought, the slow development of industry, 
and the rise of a new movement for national freedom. The 
awakening of India was two-fold: she looked to the west and, 

330 



at the same time, she looked at herself and her own past. 
The coming of the railway to India brought the industrial 
age on its positive side; so far only the negative aspect, in the 
shape of manufactured goods from Britain, had been in evidence. 
In 1860 the duty on imported machinery, imposed so as to prevent 
the industrialization of India, was removed, and large-scale 
industry began to develop, chiefly with British capital. First came 
the jute industry of Bengal, with its nerve centre at Dundee in 
Scotland; much later, cotton mills grew up in Ahmedabad and 
Bombay, largely with Indian capital and under Indian ownership; 
then came mining. Obstruction from the British Government in 
India continued, and an excise duty was put on Indian cotton 
goods to prevent them from competing with Lancashire textiles, 
even in India. Nothing, perhaps, reveals the police-state policy 
of the Government of India more than the fact that they had no 
department of agriculture and no department of commerce and 
industry till the twentieth century. It was, I believe, chiefly due 
to the donation of an American visitor, given for agricultural 
improvement in India, that a department of agriculture was 
started in the central government. (Even now this department is 
a very small affair.) A department for commerce and industry 
followed soon after, in 1905. Even then these departments func- 
tioned in a very small way. The growth of industry was artificially 
restricted and India's natural economic development was arrested. 

Though the masses of India were desperately poor and grow- 
ing poorer, a tiny fringe at the top was prospering under the 
new conditions and accumulating capital. It was this fringe that 
demanded political reform as well as opportunities for invest- 
ment. On the political side, the Indian National Congress was 
started in 1885. Commerce and industry grew slowly, and it is 
interesting to note that the classes who took to them were pre- 
dominantly those whose hereditary occupations for hundreds of 
years had been trade and commerce. Ahmedabad, the new centre 
of the textile industry, had been a famous manufacturing and 
trade centre during the Mughal period and even earlier, export- 
ing its products to foreign countries. The big merchants of 
Ahmedabad had their own ships for this seaborne trade to Africa 
and the Persian Gulf. Broach, the seaport near by, was well- 
known in Graeco-Roman times. 

The people of Gujrat, Kathiawar, and Cutch were traders, 
manufacturers, merchants, and seafaring folk from ancient times. 
Many changes took place in India, but they carried on with 
their old business, adapting them to new conditions. They are 
now among the most prominent leaders in industry and com- 
merce. Religion or a change of religion made no difference. The 
Parsees, who originally settled in Gujrat thirteen hundred years 
ago, may be considered as Gujratis for this purpose. (Their 

331 



language has long been Gujrati.) Among the Moslems the most 
prominent sects in business and industry are the Khojas, Memons, 
and Bohras. All of these are converts from Hinduism, and all 
come from Gujrat, Kathiawar, or Cutch. All these Gujratis not 
only dominate industry and business in India, but have spread 
out to Burma, Ceylon, East Africa, South Africa, and other foreign 
countries. 

The Marwaris from Rajputana used to control internal trade 
and finance, and were to be found at all the nerve centres of 
India. They were the big financiers as well as the small village' 
bankers; a note from a well-known Marwari financial house 
would be honoured anywhere in India, and even abroad. The 
Marwaris still represent big finance in India but have added 
industry to it now. 

The Sindhis in the north-west have also an old commercial 
tradition, and with their headquarters at Shikarpur or Hydera- 
bad they used to spread out over central and western Asia and 
elsewhere. To-day (that is before the war) there is hardly a port 
anywhere in the world where one or more Sindhi shops cannot 
be found. Some of the Punjabis also have been traditionally in 
business. 

The Chettys of Madras have also been leaders in business, and 
banking especially, from ancient times. The word 'Chetty' is 
derived from the Sanskrit 'Shreshthi,' the leader of a merchant 
guild. The common appellation 'Seth' is also derived from 
'Shreshthi.' The Madras Chettys have not only played an im- 
portant part in south India, but they spread out all over Burma, 
even in the remoter villages. 

Within each province also trade and commerce were largely in 
the hands of the old vaishya class, who had been engaged in 
business for untold generations. They were the retail and whole- 
sale dealers and moneylenders. In each village there was a bania's 
shop, which dealt in the necessaries of village life and advanced 
loans, on very profitable terms, to the villagers. The rural 
credit system was almost entirely in the hands of these banias. 
They spread even to the tribal and independent territories of the 
north-west and performed important functions there. As poverty 
grew agricultural indebtedness also grew rapidly, and the money- 
lending establishments held mortgages on the land and eventually 
acquired much of it. Thus the moneylender became the land- 
lord also. 

These demarcations of commercial, trading, and banking 
classes from others became less clearly defined as newcomers crept 
into various business; but they continued and are still marked. 
Whether they are due to the caste system, or the hold of tradi- 
tion, or inherited capacity, or all of these together, it is difficult 
to specify. Undoubtedly among Brahmins and Kshatriyas busi- 

332 



ness was looked down upon, and even the accumulation of money, 
though agreeable enough, was not a sufficient recompense. The 
possession of land was a symbol of social position, as in feudal 
times, and scholarship and learning were respected, even apart 
from possession. Under British rule government service gave 
prestige, security, and status, and later, when Indians were allowed 
to enter the Indian Civil Service, this service, called the 'heaven- 
born service' — heaven being some pale shadow of Whitehall — 
became the Elysium of the English-educated classes. The pro- 
fessional classes, especially lawyers, some of whom earned large 
incomes in the new law courts also had prestige and high status 
and attracted young men. Inevitably these lawyers took the lead 
in political and social reform movements. 

The Bengalis were the first to take to the law, and some of 
them flourished exceedingly and cast a glamour over their pro- 
fession. They were also the political leaders. They did not fit 
into the growing industry, either because of lack of aptitude or 
other reasons. The result has been that when industry began to 
play an important part in the country's life and to influence 
politics, Bengal lost its pre-eminence in the political field. The 
old current, when Bengalis poured out of their province as 
Government servants and in other capacities, was reversed and 
people from other provinces poured into Bengal, especially in 
Calcutta, and permeated the commercial and industrial life 
there. Calcutta had been and continues to be the chief centre of 
British capital and industry, and the English and the Scotch 
dominate business there; but they are being caught up by Mar- 
waris and Gujratis. Even petty trades in Calcutta are often in 
non-Bengali hands. All the thousands of taxi-drivers in Calcutta, 
almost without an exception, are Sikhs from the Punjab. 

Bombay became the centre and headquarters of Indian-owned 
industry, commerce, banking, insurance, etc. The Parsees, the 
Gujratis, and Marwaris, were the leaders in all these activities, 
and it is significant to note that the Maharashtrians or Marathas 
have played very little part in them. Bombay is a huge cosmopo- 
litan city now but its population consists mainly of Marathas 
and Gujratis. The Marathas have distinguished themselves in 
the professions and in scholarship; they make, as one would ex- 
pect, good soldiers; and large numbers of them are employed as 
workers in the textile mills. They are hardy and wiry and, as a 
province, poor; they are proud of the Shivaji tradition and of 
the achievements of their forefathers. The Gujratis are soft in 
body, gentler, richer, and perfectly at home in trade and com- 
merce. Perhaps these differences are largely due to geography, 
for the Maratha country is bare and hard and mountainous 
while Gujrat is rich and fertile. 

It is interesting to observe these and other differences in 

333 



various parts of India which continue to persist, though they tend 
to grow less. Madras, highly intellectual, has produced and still 
produces distinguished philosophers, mathematicians, and scientists. 
Bombay is now almost entirely devoted to business with all its 
advantages and disadvantages. Bengal, rather backward in 
industry and business, has produced some fine scientists, and 
has especially distinguished itself in art and literature. The Punjab 
has produced no outstanding personalities but is a go-ahead pro- 
vince advancing in many fields; its people are hard-headed, 
make good mechanics, and are successful in small trades and petty 
industries. The United Provinces (including Delhi) are a curious 
amalgam, and in some ways an epitome of India. They are the 
seat of the old Hindu culture as well as of the Persian culture 
that came in Afghan and Mughal times, and hence the mixture 
ofthe two is most in evidence there, intermingled with the culture 
of the west. There is less of provincialism there than in any other 
part of India. For long they have considered themselves, and 
have been looked upon by others, as the heart of India. Indeed, 
in popular parlance, they are often referred to as Hindustan. 

These differences, it must be noted, are geographical and not 
religious. A Bengali Moslem is far nearer to a Bengali Hindu 
than he is to a Punjabi Moslem; so also with others. If a num- 
ber of Hindu and Moslem Bengalis happen to meet anywhere, 
in India or elsewhere, they will immediately congregate together 
and feel at home with each other. Punjabis, whether Moslem or 
Hindu or Sikh, will do likewise. The Moslems of the Bombay 
presidency (Khojas, Memons, and Bohras) have many Hindu 
customs; the Khojas (they are the followers of the Aga Khan) 
and the Bohras are not looked upon as orthodox by the Moslems 
of the north. 

Moslems, as a whole, especially in Bengal and the north, not 
only kept away from English education for a long time, but also 
took little part in the growth of industry. Partly this was due to 
feudal modes of thought, partly (as in Roman Catholicism) to 
Islam's prohibition against usury and interest on money. But, 
curiously enough, among the notorious moneylenders are a 
particular tribe of Pathans, who come from near the frontier. 
Moslems were thus, in the second half of the nineteenth century, 
backward in English education and therefore in contacts with 
western thought, as also in government service and in industry. 

The growth of industry in India, slow and arrested as it was, 
gave the impression of progress and attracted attention. And yet 
it made practically no difference to the problem of the poverty 
of the masses and the overburden on the land. A few hundred 
thousand workers were transferred to industry out of the scores 
of millions of the unemployed and partially employed. This 
change-over was so extremely small that it did not affect the 

334 



increasing ruralization of the country. Widespread unemploy- 
ment and the pressure on land led to emigration of workers on 
a substantial scale to foreign countries, often under humiliating 
conditions. They went to South Africa, Fiji, Trinidad, Jamaica, 
Guiana, Mauritius, Ceylon, Burma, and Malaya. The small 
groups or individuals who found opportunities for growth and 
betterment under foreign rule were divorced from the masses, 
whose condition continued to worsen. Some capital accumulated 
in the hands of these groups and conditions were gradually 
created for further growth. But the basic problems of poverty 
and unemployment remained untouched. 

Reform and Other Movements among Hindus 
and Moslems 

The real impact of the west came to India in the nineteenth 
century through technical changes and their dynamic conse- 
quences. In the realm of ideas also there was shock and change, 
a widening of the horizon which had so long been confined with- 
in a narrow shell. The first reaction, limited to the small Eng- 
lish educated class, was one of admiration and acceptance of 
almost everything western. Repelled by some of the social customs 
and practices of Hinduism, many Hindus were attracted towards 
Christianity, and some notable conversions took place in Bengal. 
An attempt was therefore made by Raja Ram Mohan Roy to 
adapt Hinduism to this new environment and he started the 
Brahmo Samaj on a more or less rationalist and social reform 
basis. His successors, Keshab Chander Sen, gave it a more 
Christian outlook. The Brahmo Samaj influenced the rising 
middle classes of Bengal but as a religious faith it remained con- 
fined to few, among whom, however, were some outstanding 
persons and families. But even these families, though ardently 
interested in social and religious reform, tended to go back to 
the old Indian philosophic ideals of the Vedanta. 

Elsewhere in India also the same tendencies were at work and 
dissatisfaction arose at the rigid social forms and protean charac- 
ter of Hinduism as practised. One of the most notable reform 
movements was started in the second half of the nineteenth century 
by a Gujarati, Swami Dayananda Saraswati, but it took root 
among the Hindus of the Punjab. This was the Arya Samaj and 
its slogan was 'Back to the Vedas.' This slogan really meant 
an elimination of developments of the Aryan faith since the 
Vedas; the Vedanta philosophy as it subsequently developed, 
the central conception of monism, the pantheistic outlook, as 
well as popular and cruder developments, were all alike severely 
condemned. Even the Vedas were interpreted in a particular 
way. The Arya Samaj was a reaction to the influence of Islam 

335 



and Christianity, more especially the former. It was a crusading 
and reforming movement from within, as well as a defensive 
organization for protection against external attacks. It intro- 
duced proselytization into Hinduism and thus tended to come 
into conflict with other proselytizing religions. The Arya Samaj, 
which had been a close approach to Islam, tended to become a 
defender of everything Hindu, against what it considered as the 
encroachments of other faiths. It is significant that it spread 
chiefly among the middle-class Hindus of the Punjab and the 
United Provinces. At one time it was considered by the Govern- 
ment as a politically revolutionary movement, but the large 
numbers of Government servants in it made it thoroughly res- 
pectable. It has done very good work in the spread of education 
both among boys and girls, in improving the condition of women, 
and in raising the status and standards of the depressed classes. 

About the same period as Swami Dayananda, a different type 
of person lived in Bengal and his life influenced many of the 
new English-educated classes. He was Shri Ramakrishna Parama- 
hansa, a simple man, no scholar but a man of faith, and not 
interested in social reform as such. He was in a direct line with 
Chaitanya and other Indian saints. Essentially religious and 
yet broad-minded, in his search for .self-realization he had even 
met Moslem and Christian mystics some of whom lived with 
him for some time. He settled down at Dakshineshwar near 
Calcutta, and his extraordinary personality and character 
gradually attracted attention. People who went to visit him, and 
some who were even inclined to scoff at this simple man of faith, 
were powerfully influenced and many who had been completely 
westernized felt that here was something they had missed. 
Stressing the essentials of religious faith, he linked up the various 
aspects of the Hindu religion and philosophy and seemed to 
represent all of them in his own person. Indeed he brought 
within his fold other religions also. Opposed to all sectarianism, 
he emphasized that all roads lead to truth. He was like some of 
the saints we read about in the past records of Asia and Europe. 
Difficult to understand in the context of modern life, and yet 
fitting into India's many-coloured pattern and accepted and 
revered by many of her people as a man with a touch of the 
divine fire about him. His personality impressed itself on all 
who saw him and many who never saw him have been influenced 
by the story of his life. Among these latter is Romain Rolland 
who has written a story of his life and that of his chief disciple, 
Swami Vivekananda. 

Vivekananda, together with his brother disciples, founded the 
non-sectarian Ramakrishna Mission of service. Rooted in the 
past and full of pride in India's heritage, Vivekananda was yet 
modern in his approach to life's problems and was a kind of 

336 



bridge between the past of India and her present. He was a 
powerful orator in Bengali and English and a graceful writer 
of Bengali prose and poetry. He was a fine figure of a man, 
imposing, full of poise and dignity, sure of himself and his mission, 
and at the same time full of a dynamic and fiery energy and a 
passion to push India forward. He came as a tonic to the depressed 
and demoralized Hindu mind and gave it self-reliance and some 
roots in the past. He attended the Parliament of Religions in 
Chicago in 1893, spent over a year in the U.S.A., travelled across 
Europe, going as far as Athens and Constantinople, and visited 
Egypt, China, and Japan. Wherever he went, he created a minor 
sensation not only by his presence but by what he said and how 
he said it. Having seen this Hindu Sanyasin once it was difficult 
to forget him or his message. In America he was called the 'cyc- 
lonic Hindu.' He was himself greatly influenced by his travels 
in western countries; he admired British perseverence and the 
vitality and spirit of equality of the American people. America 
is the best field in the world to carry on any idea,' he wrote to a 
friend in India. But he was not impressed by the manifestations 
of religion in the west and his faith in the Indian philosophical 
and spiritual background became firmer. India, in spite of her 
degradation, still represented to him the Light. 

He preached the monism of the Advaita philosophy of the 
Vedanta and was convinced that only this could be the future 
religion of thinking humanity. For the Vedanta was not only 
spiritual but rational and in harmony with scientific investiga- 
tions of external nature. 'This universe has not been created 
by any extra-cosmic God, nor is it the work of any outside genius. 
It is self-creating, self-dissolving, self-manifesting, One Infinite 
Existence, the Brahma.' The Vedanta ideal was of the solidarity 
of man and his inborn divine nature; to see God in man is the 
real God-vision; man is the greatest of all beings. But 'the abstract 
Vedanta must become living — poetic — in everyday life; out of 
hopelessly intricate mythology must come concrete moral forms; 
and out of bewildering Yogi-ism must come the most scientific 
and practical psychology.' India had fallen because she had 
narrowed herself, gone into her shell and lost touch with other 
nations, and thus sunk into a state of 'mummified' and 'crystallized' 
civilization. Caste, which was necessary and desirable in its early 
forms, and meant to develop individuality and freedom, had 
become a monstrous degradation, the opposite of what it was 
meant to be, and had crushed the masses. Caste was a form of 
social organization which was and should be kept separate from 
religion. Social organizations should change with the changing 
limes. Passionately, Vivekananda condemned the meaningless 
metaphysical discussions and arguments about ceremonials and 
especially the touch-me-notism of the upper caste. 'Our religion 

337 



is in the kitchen. Our God is the cooking-pot, and our religion is: 
"don't touch me, I am holy." ' 

He kept away from politics and disapproved of the politicians 
of his day. But again and again he laid stress on the necessity 
for liberty and equality and the raising of the masses. 'Liberty 
of thought and action is the only condition of life, of growth 
and well-being. Where it does not exist, the man, the race, the 
nation must go.' 'The only hope of India is from the masses. 
The upper classes are physically and morally dead.' He wanted 
to combine western progress with India's spiritual background. 
'Make a European society with India's religion.' 'Become an 
occidental of occidentals in your spirit of equality, freedom, 
work, and energy, and at the same time a Hindu to the very 
backbone in religious culture, and instincts.' Progressively, 
Vivekananda grew more international in outlook: 'Even in 
politics and sociology, problems that were only national twenty 
years ago can no longer be solved on national grounds only. 
They are assuming huge proportions, gigantic shapes. They can 
only be solved when looked at in the broader light of interna- 
tional grounds. International organizations, international com- 
binations, international laws are the cry of the day. That shows 
solidarity. In science, every day they are coming to a similar 
broad view of matter.' And again: 'There cannot be any pro- 
gress without the whole world following in the wake, and it is 
becoming every day clearer that the solution of any problem 
can never be attained on racial, or national, or narrow grounds. 
Every idea has to become broad till it covers the whole of this 
world, every aspiration must go on increasing till it has engulfed 
the whole of humanity, nay the whole of life, within its scope.' 
All this fitted in with Vivekananda's view of the Vedanta philo- 
sophy, and he preached this from end to end of India. 'I am 
thoroughly convinced that no individual or nation can live by 
holding itself apart from the community of others, and wherever 
such an attempt has been made under false ideas of greatness, 
policy or holiness — the result has always been disastrous to the 
secluding one.' 'The fact of our isolation from all the other 
nations of the world is the cause of our degeneration and its 
only remedy is getting back into the current of the rest of the 
world. Motion is the sign of life.' 

He once wrote: 'I am a socialist not because I think it is a 
perfect system, but half a loaf is better than no bread. The other 
systems have been tried and found wanting. Let this one be 
tried — if for nothing else, for the novelty of the thing.' 

Vivekananda spoke of many things but the one constant re- 
frain of his speech and writing was abhay — be fearless, be strong. 
For him man was no miserable sinner but a part of divinity; why 
should he be afraid of anything? 'If there is a sin in the world 

338 



it is weakness; avoid all weakness, weakness is sin, weakness is 
death.' That had been the great lesson of the Upanishads. Fear 
breeds evil and weeping and wailing. There had been enough 
of that, enough of softness. 'What our country now wants are 
muscles of iron and nerves of steel, gigantic wills which nothing 
can resist, which can penetrate into the mysteries and the secrets 
of the universe, and will accomplish their purpose in any fashion, 
even if it meant going down to the bottom of the ocean and meet- 
ing death face to face.' He condemned 'occultism and mysti- 
cism. . .these creepy things; there may be great truths in them, 
but they have nearly destroyed us.... And here is the test of 
truth — anything that makes you weak physically, intellectually, 
and spiritually, reject as poison, there is no life in it, it cannot be 
true. Truth is strengthening. Truth is purity, truth is all-know- 
ledge .... These mysticisms, in spite of some grains of truth in 
them, are generally weakening... .Go back to your Upanishads, 
the shining, the strengthening, the bright philosophy; and part 
from all these mysterious things, all these weakening things. Take 
up this philosophy; the greatest truths are the simplest things in 
the world, simple as your own existence.' And beware of super- 
stition. 'I would rather see everyone of you rank atheists than 
superstitious fools, for the atheist is alive, and you can make 
something of him. But if superstition enters, the brain is gone, 

the brain is softening, degradation has seized upon the life 

Mystery-mongering and superstition are always signs of weakness.'* 

So Vivekananda thundered from Cape Comorin on the south- 
ern tip of India to the Himalayas, and he wore himself out in 
the process, dying in 1902 when he was thirty-nine years of age. 

A contemporary of Vivekananda, and yet belonging much 
more to a later generation, was Rabindranath Tagore. The 

*Most of these extracts have been taken from'Lectures from Colombo to Almora' by Swami 
Vivekananda (1933) and 'Letters of Swami Vivekananda' (1942) both published by the 
Advaita Ashrama, Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas. In the 'Letters' p. 390, there is a 
remarkable letter written by Vivekananda to a Moslem friend. In the course of this he writes : 

' Whether we call it Vedantism or any ism, the truth is that Advaitism is the last word of 
religion and thought and the only position from which one can look upon all religions and 
sects with love. We believe it is the religion of the future enlightened humanity. The Hindus 
may get the credit of arriving at it earlier than other races, they being an older race than 
either the Hebrew or the Arab; yet practical Advaitism, which looks upon and behaves to all 
mankind as one's own soul, isyet to be developed among the Hindus universally. 

'On the other hand our experience is that if ever the followers of any religion approach to 
this equality in an appreciable degree in the plane of practical work-a-day life — it may be 
i/uite unconscious generally of the deeper meaning and the underlying principle of such conduct, 
which the Hindus as a rule so clearly perceive — it is those of Islam and Islam alone.... 

'For our own motherland a junction of the two great systems, Hinduism and Islam 
— Vedanta brain and Islam body — is the only hope. 

'/see in my mind's eye the future perfect India rising out of this chaos and strife, glorious 
and invincible, with Vedanta brain and Islam body.' This letter is dated Almora, June 
10th, 1898. 

339 



Tagore family had played a leading part in various reform 
movements in Bengal during the nineteenth century. There were 
men of spiritual stature in it and fine writers and artists, but 
Rabindranath towered above them all, and indeed all over India 
his position gradually became one of unchallenged supremacy. 
His long life of creative activity covered two entire generations 
and he seems almost of our present day. He was no politician, 
but he was too sensitive and devoted to the freedom of the Indian 
people to remain always in his ivory tower of poetry and song. 
Again and again he stepped out of it, when he could tolerate 
some development no longer, and in prophetic language warned 
the British Government or his own people. He played a prominent 
part in the Swadeshi movement that swept through Bengal in the 
first decade of the twentieth century, and again when he gave 
up his knighthood at the time of the Amritsar massacre. His 
constructive work in the field of education, quietly begun, has 
already made Santiniketan one of the focal points of Indian cul- 
ture. His influence over the mind of India, and specially of succe- 
ssive rising generations, has been tremendous. Not Bengali only, 
the language in which he himself wrote, but all the modern 
languages of India have been moulded partly by his writings. 
More than any other Indian, he has helped to bring into harmony 
the ideals of the east and the west, and broadened the bases of 
Indian nationalism. He has been India's internationalist par 
excellence, believing and working for international co-operation, 
taking India's message to other countries and bringing their 
message to his own people. And yet with all his internationalism, 
his feet have always been planted firmly on India's soil and his 
mind has been saturated with the wisdom of the Upanishads. 
Contrary to the usual course of development, as he grew older he 
became more radical in his outlook and views. Strong individualist 
as he was, he became an admirer of the great achievements of the 
Russian Revolution, especially in the spread of education, culture, 
health, and the spirit of equality. Nationalism is a narrowing 
creed, and nationalism in conflict with a dominating imperialism 
produces all manner of frustrations and complexes. It was Tagore's 
immense service to India, as it has been Gandhi's in a different 
plane, that he forced the people in some measure out of their narrow 
grooves of thought and made them think of broader issues affecting 
humanity. Tagore was the great humanist of India. 

Tagore and Gandhi have undoubtedly been the two outstand- 
ing and dominating figures of India in this first half of the 
twentieth century. It is instructive to compare and contrast them. 
No two persons could be so different from one another in their 
make up or temperaments. Tagore, the aristocractic artist, turned 
democrat with proletarian sympathies, represented essentially 
the cultural tradition of India, the tradition of accepting life 

340 



in the fullness thereof and going through it with song and dance. 
Gandhi, more a man of the people, almost the embodiment of 
the Indian peasant, represented the other ancient tradition of 
India, that of renunciation and asceticism. And yet Tagore was 
primarily the man ofthought, Gandhi of concentrated and ceaseless 
activity. Both, in their different ways had a world outlook, and 
both were at the same time wholly Indian. They seemed to 
present different but harmonious aspects of India and to comple- 
ment one another. 

Tagore and Gandhi bring us to our present age. But we were 
considering an earlier period and the effect produced on the 
people, and especially the Hindus, by the stress laid by Viveka- 
nanda and others on the past greatness of India and their pride 
in it. Vivekananda himself was careful to warn his people not 
to dwell too much on the past, but to look to the future. 'When, 
O Lord,' he wrote, 'shall our land be free from this eternal 
dwelling upon the past?' But he himself and others had evoked 
that past, and there was a glamour in it, and no getting away 
from it. 

This looking back to the past and finding comfort and sus- 
tenance there was helped by a renewed study of ancient litera- 
ture and history, and later by the story of the Indian colonies in 
the eastern seas, as this unfolded itself. Mrs. Annie Besant was 
a powerful influence in adding to the confidence of the Hindu 
middle classes in their spiritual and national heritage. There 
was a spiritual and religious element about all this, and yet 
there was a strong political background to it. The rising middle 
classes were politically inclined and were not so much in search 
of a religion; but they wanted some cultural roots to cling on to,, 
something that gave them assurance of their own worth, some- 
thing that would reduce the sense of frustration and humilia- 
tion that foreign conquest and rule had produced. In every 
country with a growing nationalism there is this search apart 
from religion, this tendency to go to the past. Iran, without in 
any way weakening in its religious faith, has deliberately gone 
back to its pre-Islamic days of greatness and utilized this memory 
to strengthen its present-day nationalism. So also in other coun- 
tries. The past of India, with all its cultural variety and great- 
ness, was a common heritage of all the Indian people, Hindu 
Moslem, Christian, and others, and their ancestors had helped 
to build it. The fact of subsequent conversion to other faiths 
did not deprive them of this heritage; just as the Greeks, after 
their conversion to Christianity, did not lose their pride in the 
mighty achievements of their ancestors, or the Italians in the 
great days of the Roman Republic and early empire. If all the 
people of India had been converted to Islam or Christianity, her 
cultural heritage would still have remained to inspire them and 

341 



give them that poise and dignity, which a long record of civilized 
existence with all its mental struggles with the problems of life 
gives a people. 

If we had been an independent nation, all of us in this country 
working together in the present for a common future would no 
doubt have looked to our common past with equal pride. Indeed, 
during the Mughal period, the emperors and their chief associates, 
newcomers as they were, wanted to identify themselves with that 
past and to share it with others. But the accidents and processes 
of history, helped no doubt by man's policy and weaknesses, worked 
differently, and the changes which came prevented normal 
development. One would have expected that the new middle 
class, which was the product of the impact from the west and of 
technological and economic changes, would have a common back- 
ground in Hindu and Moslem alike. To some extent this was so, 
and yet differences arose which were not present, or were present 
in far lesser degree, in the feudal and semi-feudal classes and the 
masses. The Hindu and Moslem masses were hardly distinguishable 
from each other, the old aristocracy had developed common ways 
and standards. They yet followed a common culture and had 
common custom and festivals. The middle classes began to 
diverge psychologically and later in other ways. 

To begin with, the new middle classes were almost absent 
among the Moslems. Their avoidance of western education, their 
keeping away from trade and industry, and their adherence to 
feudal ways, gave a start to the Hindus which they profited by 
and retained. British policy was inclined to be pro-Hindu and 
anti-Moslem, except in the Punjab, where Moslems took more 
easily to western education than elsewhere. But the Hindus had 
got a big start long before the British took possession of the 
Punjab. Even in the Punjab, though conditions were more equal 
for the Hindu and Moslem, the Hindus had an economic advan- 
tage. Anti-foreign sentiment was shared alike by the Hindu and 
Moslem aristocracy and the masses. The Revolt of 1857 was a 
joint affair, but in its suppression Moslems felt strongly, and to 
some extent rightly, that they were the greater sufferers. This 
Revolt also put an end finally to any dreams or fantasies of the 
revival of the Delhi empire. That empire had vanished long ago, 
even before the British arrived upon the scene. The Marathas 
had smashed it and controlled Delhi itself. Ranjit Singh ruled 
in the Punjab. Mughal rule had ended in the north without any 
intervention of the British, and in the south also it had disintegrated. 
Yet the shadow emperor sat in the Delhi palace, and though he 
had become a dependant and pensioner of the Marathas and the 
British successively, still he was a symbol of a famous dynasty. 
Inevitably, during the Revolt the rebels tried to take advantage 
of this symbol, in spite of his weakness and unwillingness. The 

342 



ending of the Revolt meant also the smashing of the symbol. 

As the people recovered slowly from the horror of the Mutiny 
days, there was a blank in their minds, a vacuum which sought 
for something to fill it. Of necessity, British rule had to be accep- 
ted, but the break with the past had brought something more 
than a new government; it had brought doubt and confusion 
and a loss of faith in themselves. That break indeed had come 
long before the Mutiny, and had led to the many movements 
of thought in Bengal and elsewhere to which I have already 
referred. But the Moslems generally had then retired into their 
shells far more than the Hindus, avoided western education, and 
lived in day-dreams of a restoration of the old order. There could 
be no more dreaming now, but there had to be something to which 
they could cling on. They still kept away from the new education. 
Gradually and after much debate and difficulty, Sir Syed Ahmad 
Khan turned their minds towards English education and started 
the Aligarh College. That was the only avenue leading to govern- 
ment service, and the lure of that service proved powerful enough 
to overcome old resentments and prejudices. The fact that Hindus 
had gone far ahead in education and service was disliked, and 
proved a powerful argument to do likewise. Parsees and Hindus 
were also going ahead in industry, but Moslem attention was 
directed to government service alone. 

But even this new direction to their activities, which was really 
confined to comparatively few, did not resolve the doubt and 
confusion of their minds. Hindus, in like straits, had looked back 
and sought consolation in ancient times. Old philosophy and 
literature, art and history, had brought some comfort. Ram 
Mohan Roy, Dayananda, Vivekananda, and others had started 
new movements of thought. While they drank from the rich 
streams of English literature their minds were also full of ancient 
sages and heroes of India, their thoughts and deeds, and of the 
myths and traditions which they had imbibed from their child- 
hood. 

Much of this was common to the Moslem masses, who were 
well acquainted with these traditions. But it began to be felt, 
especially by the Moslem upper classes, that it was not quite 
proper for them to associate themselves with these semi-religious 
traditions, that any encouragement of them would be against 
the spirit of Islam. They searched for their national roots else- 
where. To some extent they found them in the Afghan and 
Mughal periods of India, but this was not quite enough to fill 
the vacuum. Those periods were common for Hindus and Moslems 
alike, and the sense of foreign intrusion had disappeared from 
Hindu minds. The Mughal rulers were looked upon as Indian 
national rulers, though in the case of Aurungzeb there was a 
difference of opinion. It is significant that Akbar, whom the 

343 



Hindus especially admired, has not been approved of in recent 
years by some Moslems. Last year the 400th anniversary of his 
birth was celebrated in India. All classes of people, including 
many Moslems, joined, but the Moslem League kept aloof because 
Akbar was a symbol of India's unity. 

This search for cultural roots led Indian Moslems (that is, 
some of them of the middle class) to Islamic history, and to the 
periods when Islam was a conquering and creative force in 
Baghdad, Spain, Constantinople, central Asia, and elsewhere. 
There had always been interest in this history and some contacts 
with neighbouring Islamic countries. There was also the Haj 
pilgrimage to Mecca, which brought Moslems from various 
countries together. But all such contacts were limited and super- 
ficial and did not really affect the general outlook of Indian 
Moslems, which was confined to India. The Afghan kings of 
Delhi, especially Muhammad Tughlaq, had acknowledged the 
Khalifa (Caliph) at Cairo. The Ottoman emperors at Constan- 
tinople subsequently became the Khalifas, but they were not 
recognized as such in India. The Mughal Emperors in India 
recognized no Khalifa or spiritual superiors outside India. It was 
only after the complete collapse of the Mughal power early in 
the nineteenth century that the name of the Turkish Sultan began 
to be mentioned in Indian mosques. This practice was confirmed 
after the Mutiny. 

Thus Indian Moslems sought to derive some psychological 
satisfaction from a contemplation of Islam's past greatness, 
chiefly in other countries, and in the fact of the continuance 
of Turkey as an independent Moslem power, practically the only 
one left. This feeling was not opposed to or in conflict with 
Indian nationalism; indeed, many Hindus admired and were 
well acquainted with Islamic history. They sympathized with 
Turkey because they considered the Turks as Asiatic victims of 
European aggression. Yet the emphasis was different, and in 
their case that feeling did not supply a psychological need as 
it did in the case of the Moslems. 

After the Mutiny the Indian Moslems had hesitated which 
way to turn. The British Government had deliberately repressed 
them to an even greater degree than it had repressed the Hindus, 
and this repression had especially affected those sections of the 
Moslems from which the new middle class, the bourgeoise, might 
have been drawn. They felt down and out and were intensely 
anti-British as well as conservative. British policy towards them 
underwent a gradual change in the seventies and became more 
favourable. This change was essentially due to the policy of 
balance and counterpoise which the British Government had 
consistently pursued. Still, in this process, Sir Syed Ahmad Khan 
played an important part. He was convinced that he could only 

344 



raise the Moslems through co-operation with the British authori- 
ties. He was anxious to make them accept English education and 
thus to draw them out of their conservative shells. He had been 
much impressed by what he had seen of European civilization, 
and, indeed, some of his letters from Europe indicate that he was 
so dazed that he had rather lost his balance. 

Sir Syed was an ardent reformer and he wanted to reconcile 
modern scientific thought with Islam. This was to be done, of 
course, not by attacking any basic belief, but by a rationalistic 
interpretation of scripture. He pointed out the basic similarities 
between Islam and Christianity. He attacked purdah (the seclu- 
sion of women) among the Moslems. He was opposed to any 
allegiance to the Turkish Khalifat. Above all, he was anxious 
to push a new type of education. The beginnings of the national 
movement frightened him, for he thought that any opposition 
to the British authorities would deprive him of their help in 
his educational programme. That help appeared to him to be 
essential, and so he tried to tone down anti-British sentiments 
among the Moslems artd to turn them away from the National 
Congress which was taking shape then. One of the declared 
objects of the Aligarh College he founded was 'to make the Mus- 
sulmans of India worthy and useful subjects of the British crown.' 
He was not opposed to the National Congress because he con- 
sidered it predominantly a Hindu organization; he opposed it 
because he thought it was politically too aggressive (though it 
was mild enough in those days), and he wanted British help and 
co-operation. He tried to show that Moslems as a whole had not 
rebelled during the Mutiny and that many had remained loyal 
to the British power. He was in no way anti-Hindu or communally 
separatist. Repeatedly he emphasized that religious differences 
should have no political or national significance. 'Do you not 
inhabit the same land?' he said. 'Remember that the words 
Hindu and Mohammedan are only meant for religious distinction; 
otherwise all persons, whether Hindu or Mohammedan, even 
the Christians who reside in this country, are all in this particular 
respect belonging to one and the same nation.' 

Sir Syed Ahmad Khan's influence was confined to certain 
sections of the upper classes among the Moslems; he did not 
touch the urban or rural masses. These masses were almost 
completely cut off from their upper classes and were far nearer 
to the Hindu masses. While some among the Moslem upper 
classes were descendants of the ruling groups during Mughal 
times, the masses had no such background or tradition. Most 
of them had been converted from the lowest strata of Hindu 
society and were most unhappily situated, being among the 
poorest and the most exploited. 

Sir Syed had a number of able and notable colleagues. In his 

345 



rationalistic approach he was supported, among others, by Syed 
Chirag Ali and Nawab Mohsin-ul-Mulk. His educational activi- 
ties attracted Munshi Karamat Ali, Munshi Zakaullah of Delhi, 
Dr. Nazir Ahmad, Maulana Shibli Nomani, and the poet Hali, 
who is one of the outstanding figures of Urdu literature. Sir 
Syed succeeded in so far as the beginnings of English education 
among the Moslems were concerned, and in diverting the Moslem 
mind from the political movement. A Mohammedan educational 
conference was started and this attracted the rising Moslem middle 
class in the professions and services. 

None the less many prominent Moslems joined the National 
Congress. British policy became definitely pro-Moslem, or rather 
in favour of those elements among the Moslems who were opposed 
to the national movement. But early in the twentieth century the 
tendency towards nationalism and political activity became more 
noticeable among the younger generation of Moslems. To divert 
this and provide a safe channel for it, the Moslem League was 
started in 1906 under the inspiration of the British Government 
and the leadership of one of its chief supporters, the Aga Khan. 
The League had two principal objects: loyalty to the British 
Government and the safeguarding of Moslem interests. 

It is worth noting that during the post-Mutiny period all the 
leading men among Indian Moslems, including Sir Syed Ahmad 
Khan, were products of the old traditional education, although 
some of them added knowledge of English later and were 
influenced by new ideas. The new western education had yet 
produced no notable figure among them. The leading poet in 
Urdu and one of the outstanding literary figures of the century 
in India, was Ghalib, who was in his prime before the Mutiny. 

In the early years of the twentieth century there were two 
trends among the Moslem intelligentsia: one, chiefly among the 
younger element, was towards nationalism, the other was a 
deviation from India's past and even, to some extent, her pre- 
sent, and a greater interest in Islamic countries, especially 
Turkey, the seat of the Khilafat. The Pan-Islamic movement, 
encouraged by Sultan Abdul Hamid of Turkey, had found some 
response in the upper strata of Indian Moslems, and yet Sir 
Syed had opposed this and written against Indians interesting 
themselves in Turkey and the Sultanate. The young Turk move- 
ment produced mixed reactions. It was looked upon with some 
suspicion by most Moslems in India to begin with, and there 
was general sympathy for the Sultan who was considered a bul- 
wark against the intrigues of European powers in Turkey. But 
there were others, among them Abul Kalam Azad, who eagerly 
welcomed the young Turks and the promise of constitutional 
and social reform that they brought. When Italy suddenly attacked 
Turkey in the Tripoli War of 1911, and subsequently, during the 

34C 



Balkan Wars of 1912 and 1913, an astonishing wave of sympathy 
for Turkey roused Indian Moslems. All Indians felt that sympathy 
and anxiety but in the case of Moslems this was keener and some- 
thing almost personal. The last remaining Moslem power was 
threatened with extinction; the sheet-anchor of their faith in the 
future was being destroyed. Dr. M. A. Ansari led a strong medical 
mission to Turkey and even the poor subscribed; money came 
more rapidly than for any proposal for the uplift of the Indian 
Moslems themselves. World War I was a time of trial for the 
Moslems because Turkey was on the other side. They felt helpless 
and could do nothing. When the war ended their pent-up feelings 
were to break out in the Khilafat movement. 

The year 1912 was notable also in the development of the 
Moslem mind in India because of the appearance of two new 
weeklies, the Al-Hilal in Urdu and The Comrade in English. 
The Al-Hilal was started by Abul Kalam Azad (the present Con- 
gress President), a brilliant young man of twenty-four, who had 
received his early education in Al Azhar University of Cairo 
and, while yet in his teens, had become well-known for his Arabic 
and Persian scholarship and deep learning. To this he added a 
knowledge of the Islamic world outside India and of the reform 
movements that were coursing through it, as well as of European 
developments. Rationalist in outlook and yet profoundly versed 
in Islamic lore and history, he interpreted scripture from a ration- 
alist point of view. Soaked in Islamic tradition and with many 
personal contacts with prominent Moslem leaders and reformers 
in Egypt, Turkey, Syria, Palestine, Iraq and Iran, he was power- 
fully affected by political and cultural developments in these 
countries. Because of his writings he was known in the Islamic 
countries probably more than any other Indian Moslem. The 
wars in which Turkey became involved aroused his intense interest 
and sympathy; and yet his approach was different from that of 
the older Moslem leaders. He had a wider and more rationalist 
outlook which kept him away from the feudal and narrowly 
religious and separatist approach of these older leaders, and 
inevitably made him an Indian nationalist. He had himself seen 
nationalism growing in Turkey and the other Islamic countries 
and he applied that knowledge to India and saw in the Indian 
national movement a similar development. Other Moslems in 
India were hardly aware of these movements elsewhere and, 
wrapped up in their own feudal atmosphere, had little appreciation 
of what was happening there. They thought in religious terms 
only and if they sympathised with Turkey it was chiefly because 
of that religious bond. In spite of that intense sympathy, they 
were not in tune with the nationalist and rather secular move- 
ments in Turkey. 

Abul Kalam Azad spoke in a new language to them in his 



weekly Al-Hilal. It was not only a new language in thought and 
approach, even its texture was different, for Azad's style was 
tense and virile, though sometimes a little difficult because of 
its Persian background. He used new phrases for new ideas and 
was a definite influence in giving shape to the Urdu language, 
as it is to-day. The older conservative leaders among the Moslems 
did not react favourably to all this and criticized Azad's opinions 
and approach. Yet not even the most learned of them could 
easily meet Azad in debate and argument, even on the basis of 
scripture and old tradition, for Azad's knowledge of these happened 
to be greater than theirs. He was a strange mixture of mediaeval 
scholasticism, eighteenth century rationalism, and the modern 
outlook. 

There were a few among the older generation who approved 
of Azad's writings, among them being the learned Maulana 
Shibli Nomani, who had himself visited Turkey, and who had 
been associated with Sir Syed Ahmad Khan in Aligarh College. 
The tradition of Aligarh College was, however, different and 
conservative, both politically and socially. Its trustees came from 
among the princes and big landlords, typical representatives of 
the feudal order. Under a succession of English principals, closely 
associated with government circles, it had fostered separatist 
tendencies and an anti-nationalist and anti-Congress outlook. 
The chief aim kept before its students was to enter government 
service in the subordinate ranks. For that a pro-government 
attitude was necessary and no truck with nationalism and sedi- 
tion. The Aligarh College group had become the leaders of the 
new Moslem intelligentsia and influenced sometimes openly, 
more often from behind the scenes, almost every Moslem move- 
ment. The Moslem League came into existence largely through 
their efforts. 

Abul Kalam Azad attacked this stronghold of conservatism 
and anti-nationalism not directly but by spreading ideas which 
undermined the Aligarh tradition. This very youthful writer 
and journalist caused a sensation in Moslem intellectual circles 
and, though the elders frowned upon him, his words created a 
ferment in the minds of the younger generation. That ferment 
had already started because of events in Turkey, Egypt, and Iran, 
as well as the development of the Indian nationalist movement. 
Azad gave a definite trend to it by pointing out that there was 
no conflict between Islam and sympathy for Islamic countries 
and Indian nationalism. This helped in bringing the Moslem 
League nearer to the Congress. Azad had himself joined the 
League, whilst yet a boy, at its first session in 1906. 

The Al-Hilal was not approved of by the representatives of 
the British Government. Securities were demanded from it under 
the Press Act and ultimately its press was confiscated in 1914. 

348 



Thus ended the Al-Hilal after a brief existence of two years. 
Azad thereupon brought out another weekly, the Al-Balagh, 
but this, too, ended in 1916 when Azad was interned by the 
British Government. For nearly four years he was kept in intern- 
ment, and when he came out at last he took his place imme- 
diately among the leaders of the National Congress. Ever since 
then he has been continuously in the highest Congress Execu- 
tive, looked upon, in spite of his youthful years, as one of the 
elders of the Congress, whose advice both in national and poli- 
tical matters as well as in regard to the communal and minority 
questions is highly valued. Twice he had been Congress presi- 
dent, and repeatedly he has spent long terms in prison. 

The other weekly that was started in 1912, some months before 
the Al-Hilal was The Comrade. This was in English and it influen- 
ced especially the younger English-educated generation of Moslems. 
It was edited by Maulana Mohammad Ali, who was an odd 
mixture of Islamic tradition and an Oxford education. He began 
as an adherent of the Aligarh tradition and was opposed to any 
aggressive politics. But he was far too able and dynamic a per- 
sonality to remain confined in that static framework, and his 
language was always vigorous and striking. The annulment of 
the Partition of Bengal in 1911 had given him a shock and his 
faith in the bona fides of the British Government had been shaken. 
The Balkan Wars moved him and he wrote passionately in 
favour of Turkey and the Islamic tradition it represented. Pro- 
gressively he grew more anti-British and the entry of Turkey in 
World War I completed the process. A famous and enormously 
long article of his (his speeches anb writings did not err on the side 
of brevity or conciseness) in The Comrade entitled 'The Choice of 
the Turks' put an end to The Comrade which was stopped by the 
government. Soon after, government arrested him and his brother 
Shaukat Ali and interned them for the duration of the war and a 
year after. They were released at the end of 1919 and both imme- 
diately joined the National Congress. The Ali Brothers played a 
very prominent part in the Khilafat agitation and in Congress 
politics in the early twenties and suffered prison for it. Moham- 
mad Ali presided over an annual session of the Congress and was 
for many years a member of its highest executive committee. He 
died in 1930. 

The change that took place in Mohammad Ali was symbolic 
of the changing mentality of the Indian Moslems. Even the 
Moslem League, founded to isolate the Moslems from nationalist 
currents and completely controlled by reactionary and semi- 
feudal elements, was forced to recognize the pressure from the 
younger generation. It was drifting, though somewhat unwil- 
lingly, with the tide of nationalism and coming nearer to the 
Congress. In 1913 it changed its creed of loyalty to government 

349 



to a demand for self-government for India. Maulana Abul Kalam 
Azad had advocated this change in his forceful writings in the Al-Hilal. 

Kemal Pasha. Nationalism in Asia. Iqbal 

Kemal Pasha was naturally popular in India with Moslems and 
Hindus alike. He had not only rescued Turkey from foreign 
domination and disruption but had foiled the machinations of 
European imperialist powers, especially England. But as the 
Ataturk's policy unfolded itself — his lack of religion, his aboli- 
tion of the Sultanate and Khilafat, the building up of a secular 
state, and his disbandment of religious orders — that popularity 
waned so far as the more orthodox Moslems were concerned and 
a silent resentment against his modernist policy rose among 
them. This very policy, however, made him more popular among 
the younger generation of both Hindus and Moslems. The 
Ataturk partly destroyed the dream structure that had gradually 
grown up in the Indian Moslem mind ever since the days of the 
Mutiny. Again a kind of vacuum was created. Many Moslems 
filled this vacuum by joining the nationalist movement, many 
had of course already joined it previously; others stood aloof, 
hesitant and doubtful. The real conflict was between feudal 
modes of thought and modern tendencies. The feudal leadership 
had for the moment been swept away by the mass Khilafat move- 
ment, but that movement itself had no solid basis in social and 
economic conditions or in the needs of the masses. It had its 
centre elsewhere, and when the core itself was eliminated by the 
Ataturk the superstructure collapsed, leaving the Moslem masses 
bewildered and disinclined to any political action. The old 
feudal leaders, who had lain low, crept back into prominence, 
helped by British policy, which had always supported them. But 
they could not come back to their old position of unquestioned 
leadership for conditions had changed. The Moslems were also 
throwing up, rather belatedly, a middle class, and the very ex- 
perience of a mass political movement, under the leadership of 
the National Congress, had made a vital difference. 

Though the mentality of the Moslem masses and the new 
growing middle class was shaped essentially by events, Sir 
Mohamad Iqbal played an important part in influencing the 
latter and especially the younger generation. The masses were 
hardly affected by him. Iqbal had begun by writing powerful 
nationalist poems in Urdu which had become popular. During 
the Balkan Wars he turned to Islamic subjects. He was influence- 
ed by the circumstances then prevailing and the mass feeling 
among the Moslems, and he himself influenced and added to the 
intensity of these sentiments. Yet he was very far from being a 
mass leader; he was a poet, an intellectual and a philosopher 

350 



with affiliations to the old feudal order; he came from Kashmiri 
Brahmin stock. He supplied in fine poetry, which was written 
both in Persian and Urdu, a philosophic background to the 
Moslem intelligentsia and thus diverted its mind in a separatist 
direction. His popularity was no doubt due to the quality of 
his poetry, but even more so it was due to his having fulfilled 
a need when the Moslem mind was searching for some anchor 
to hold on to. The old pan-Islamic ideal had ceased to have any 
meaning; there was no Khilafat and every Islamic country, Tur- 
key most of all, was intensely nationalist, caring little for other 
Islamic peoples. Nationalism was in fact the dominant force in 
Asia as elsewhere, and in India the nationalist movement had 
grown powerful and challenged British rule repeatedly. That 
nationalism had a strong appeal to the Moslem mind in India, 
and large numbers of Moslems had played a leading part in the 
struggle for freedom. Yet Indian nationalism was dominated by 
Hindus and had a Hinduised look. So a conflict arose in the 
Moslem mind; many accepted that nationalism, trying to in- 
fluence it in the direction of their choice; many sympathised 
with it and yet remained aloof, uncertain; and yet many others 
began to drift in a separatist direction for which Iqbal's poetic 
and philosophic approach had prepared them. 

This, I imagine, was the background out of which, in recent 
years, arose the cry for a division of India. There were many 
reasons, many contributory causes, errors and mistakes on every 
side, and especially the deliberate separatist policy of the British 
Government. But behind all these was this psychological back- 
ground, which itself was produced, apart from certain historical 
causes, by the delay in the development of a Moslem middle 
class in India. Essentially the internal conflict in India, apart 
from the nationalist struggle against foreign domination, is bet- 
ween the remnants of the feudal order and modernist ideas and 
institutions. That conflict exists on the national plane as well as 
within each major group, Hindu, Moslem, and others. The 
national movement, as represented essentially by the National 
Congress, undoubtedly represents the historic process of growth 
towards these new ideas and institutions, though it tries to adapt 
these to some ofthe old foundations. Because ofthis, it has attracted 
to its fold all manner of people, differing widely among themselves. 
On the Hindu side, an exclusive and rigid social order has come 
in the way of growth, and what is more, frightened other groups. 
But this social order itself has been undermined and is fast losing 
its rigidity and, in any event, is not strong enough to obstruct the 
growth of the national movement in its widest political and social 
sense, which has developed enough impetus to go ahead in spite 
of obstacles. On the Moslem side, feudal elements have con- 
tinued to be strong and have usually succeeded in imposing their 

351 



leadership on their masses. There has been a difference of a gene- 
ration or more in the development of the Hindu and Moslem 
middle classes, and that difference continues to show itself in many 
directions, political, economic, and other. It is this lag which 
produces a psychology of fear among the Moslems. 

Pakistan, the proposal to divide India, however much it may 
appeal emotionally to some, is of course no solution for this 
backwardness, and it is much more likely to strengthen the hold 
of feudal elements for some time longer and delay the economic 
progress of the Moslems. Iqbal was one of the early advocates 
of Pakistan and yet he appears to have realized its inherent 
danger and absurdity. Edward Thompson has written that, in 
the course of a conversation, Iqbal told him that he had advo- 
cated Pakistan because of his position as president of the Moslem 
League session, but he felt sure that it would be injurious to India 
as a whole and to Moslems specially. Probably he had changed 
his mind, or he had not given much thought to the question 
previously, as it had assumed no importance then. His whole 
outlook on life does not fit in with the subsequent developments 
of the idea of Pakistan or division of India. 

During his last years Iqbal turned more and more towards 
socialism. The great progress that Soviet Russia had made attract- 
ed him. Even his poetry took a different turn. A few months 
before his death, as he lay on his sick bed, he sent for me and 
I gladly obeyed the summons. As I talked to him about many 
things I felt that how much we had in common, in spite of dif- 
ferences, and how easy it would be to get on with him. He was 
in reminiscent mood and wandered .from one subject to another, 
and I listened to him, talking little myself. I admired him and 
his poetry, and it pleased me greatly to feel that he liked me 
and had a good opinion of me. A little before I left him he said to 
me: 'What is there in common between Jinnah and you? He 
is a politician, you are a patriot.' I hope there is still much in 
common between Mr. Jinnah and me. As for my being a patriot 
I do not know that this is a particular qualification in these days, 
at least in the limited sense of the word. Greatly attached as I am 
to India, I have long felt that something more than national 
attachment is necessary for us in order to understand and solve 
even our own problems, and much more so those of the world as 
a whole. But Iqbal was certainly right in holding that I was not 
much of a politician, although politics had seized me and made 
ine their victim. 

Heavy Industry Begins. Tilak and Gokhaie 
Separate Electorates 

In my desire to explore the background of the Hindu-Moslem 

352 



problems and understand what lay behind the new demand for 
Pakistan and separation, I have jumped over half a century. 
During this period many changes came, not so much in the 
external apparatus of government as in the temper of the people. 
Some trivial constitutional developments took place and these 
are often paraded, but they made no difference whatsoever to the 
authoritarian and all-pervasive character of British rule; nor 
did they touch the problems of poverty and unemployment. In 
1911 Jamshedji Tata laid the foundations of heavy industry in 
India by starting steel and iron works in what came to be known 
as Jamshedpur. Government looked with disfavour on this and 
other attempts to start industries and in no way encouraged 
them. It was chiefly with American expert help that the steel 
industry was started. It had a precarious childhood but the war 
of 1914-18 came to its help. Again it languished and was in danger 
of passing into the hands of British debenture holders, but natio- 
nalist pressure saved it. 

An industrial proletariat was growing up in India; it was 
unorganized and helpless, and the terribly low standards of the 
peasantry, from which it came, prevented wage increases and 
improvement. So far as unskilled labour was concerned, there 
were millions of unemployed persons who could be drawn upon 
and no strike could succeed in these conditions. The first Trade 
Union Congress was organized round about 1920. The numbers 
of this new proletariat were not sufficient to make any difference 
to the Indian political scene; they were a bucketful in a sea of 
peasants and workers on the land. In the 'twenties the voice of 
industrial labour began to be heard, but it was feeble. It might 
have been ignored but for the fact that the Russian Revolution 
had forced people to attach importance to the industrial proletariat. 
Some big and well-organized strikes also compelled attention. 

The peasant, though he was everywhere and his problem was 
the supreme problem of India, was even more silent and for- 
gotten by the political leaders and Government alike. The early 
stages of the political movement were dominated by the ideo- 
logical urges of the upper middle classes, chiefly the professional 
classes and those looking forward to a place in the administra- 
tive machine. With the coming-of-age of the National Congress, 
which had been founded in 1885, a new type of leadership 
appeared, more aggressive and defiant and representing the much 
larger numbers of the lower middle classes as well as students 
and young men. The powerful agitation against the partition of 
Bengal had thrown up many able and aggressive leaders there of 
this type, but the real symbol of the new age was Bal Gangadhar 
Tilak, from Maharashtra. The old leadership was represented 
also by a Maratha, a very able and a younger man, Gopal Krishna 
Gokhale. Revolutionary slogans were in the air, tempers ran 

353 



high and conflict was inevitable. To avoid this the old patriarch 
of the Congress, Dadabhai Naoroji, universally respected and 
regarded as the father of the country, was brought out of his 
retirement. The respite was brief and in 1907 the clash came, 
resulting apparently in a victory for the old moderate section. 
But this had been won because of organizational control and the 
then narrow franchise of the Congress. There was no doubt that 
the vast majority of politically minded people in India favoured 
Tilak and his group. The Congress lost much of its importance 
and interest shifted to other activities. Terroristic activity appeared 
in Bengal. The example set by Russian and Irish revolutionaries 
was being followed. 

Moslem young men were also being affected by these revolu- 
tionary ideas. The Aligarh College had tried to check this ten- 
dency and now, under Government inspiration, the Aga Khan 
and others started the Moslem League to provide a political 
platform for Moslems and thus keep them away from the Con- 
gress. More important still, and of vital significance to India's 
future development, it was decided to introduce separate electo- 
rates for Moslems. Henceforward Moslems could only stand for 
election and be elected by separate Moslem electorates. A poli- 
tical barrier was created round them isolating them from the rest 
of India and reversing the unifying and amalgamating process 
which had been going on for centuries, and which was inevitably 
being speeded up by technological developments. This barrier 
was a small one at first, for the electorates were very limited, but 
with every extension of the franchise it grew and affected the 
whole structure of public and social life, like some canker which 
corrupted the entire system. It poisoned municipal and local self- 
government and ultimately it led to fantastic divisions. There 
came into existence (much later) separate Moslem trade unions 
and students' organizations and merchants' chambers. Because 
the Moslems were backward in all these activities, these orga- 
nizations were not real organic growths from below, but were 
artificially created from above, and their leadership was held by 
the old semi-feudal type of person. Thus, to some extent, the 
Moslem middle classes and even the masses were isolated from 
the currents of growth which were influencing the rest of India. 
There were vested interests enough in India created or preserved 
by the British Government. Now an additional and powerful 
vested interest was created by separate electorates. 

It was not a temporary evil which tended to fade away with 
developing political consciousness. Nurtured by official policy, it 
grew and spread and obscured the real problems before the 
country, whether political, social, or economic. It created divi- 
sions and ill-feeling where there had been none previously, and 
it actually weakened the favoured group by increasing a tend- 

354 



ency to depend on artificial props and not to think in terms of 
self-reliance. 

The obvious policy in dealing with groups or minorities which 
were backward educationally and economically was to help them 
in every way to grow and make up these deficiencies, especially 
by a forward educational policy. Nothing of this kind was done 
either for the Moslems or for other backward minorities, or for 
the depressed classes who needed it most. The whole argument 
centred in petty appointments in the subordinate public services, 
and instead of raising standards all round, merit was often 
sacrificed. 

Separate electorates thus weakened the groups that were al- 
ready weak or backward, they encouraged separatist tendencies 
and prevented the growth ofnational unity, they were the nega- 
tion of democracy, they created new vested interests of the most 
reactionary kind, they lowered standards, and they diverted 
attention from the real economic problems of the country which 
were common to all. These electorates, first introduced among 
the Moslems, spread to other minorities and groups till India 
became a mosaic of these separate compartments. Possibly they 
may have done some good for a little while, though I am unable 
to spot it, but undoubtedly the injury they have caused to every 
department of Indian life has been prodigious. Out of them have 
grown all manner of separatist tendencies and finally the demand 
for a splitting up of India. 

Lord Morley was the Secretary of State for India when these 
separate electorates were introduced. He resisted them, but ulti- 
mately agreed under pressure from the Viceroy. He has pointed 
out in his diary the dangers inherent in such a method and how 
they would inevitably delay the development of representative 
institutions. Probably this was exactly what the Viceroy and his 
colleagues intended. In the Montague-Chelmsford Report on 
Indian Constitutional Reform (1918) the dangers of these com- 
munal electorates were again emphasized: 'Division by creeds 
and classes means the creation of political camps organized against 
j each other, and teaches men to think as partisans and not as 
citizens... .We regard any system of communal electorates, 
1 therefore, as a very serious hindrance to the development of the 
1 self-governing principle.' 



355" 



CHAPTER EIGHT 

THE LAST PHASE (2) 

Nationalism Versus Imperialism 

Helplessness of the Middle Glasses 

Gandhi Comes 



WORLD WAR I CAME. POLITICS WERE AT A LOW EBB, CHIEFLY BE- 

cause of the split in the Congress between the two sections, the 
so-called extremists and the moderates, and because of war-time 
restrictions and regulations. Yet one tendency was marked: the 
rising middle class among the Moslems was growing more nationa- 
ally minded and was pushing the Moslem League towards the 
Congress. They even joined hands. 

Industry developed during the war and produced enormous 
dividends — 100 to 200 per cent — from the jute mills of Bengal 
and the cotton mills of Bombay, Ahmedabad, and elsewhere. 
Some of these dividends flowed to the owners of foreign capital in 
Dundee and London, some went to swell the riches of Indian million- 
aires; and yet the workers who had created these dividends lived 
at an incredibly low level of existence — in 'filthy, disease-ridden 
hovels,' with no window or chimney, no light or water supply 
no sanitary arrangements. This near the so-called city of palaces 
Calcutta, dominated by British capital! In Bombay, where Indian 
capital was more in evidence, an inquiry commission found in one 
room, fifteen feet by twelve, six families, in all, thirty adults and 
children, living together. Three of these women were expecting 
a confinement soon, and each family had a separate oven in that 
one room. These are special cases, but they are not very exceptional. 
They describe conditions in the 'twenties and thirties ofthis century 
when some improvements had already been made. What these 
conditions were like previous to these improvements staggers the 
imagination.* 

I remember visiting some of these slums and hovels of indus- 
trial workers, gasping for breath there, and coming out dazed and 

* These quotations and facts are taken from B. Shiva Rao's 'The Industrial Worker i 
India' (Allen and Unwin, London, 1939) which deals with labour problems and workers 
conditions in India. 

356 



full of horror and anger. I remember also going down a coal mine 
injharia and seeing the conditions in which our womenfolk worked 
there. I can never forget that picture or the shock that came to 
me that human beings should labour thus. Women were subse- 
quently prohibited from working underground, but now they have 
been sent back there because, we are told, war needs require addi- 
tional labour; and yet millions of men are starving and unem- 
ployed. There is no lack of men, but the wages are so low and the 
conditions of work so bad that they do not attract. 

A delegation sent by the British Trade Union Congress visited 
India in 1928. In their report they said that 'In Assam tea the sweat, 
hunger, and despair of a million Indians enter year by year.' 
The Director of Public Health in Bengal, in his report for 1927- 
28, said that the peasantry of that province were 'taking to a dietary 
on which even rats could not live for more than five weeks.' 

World War I ended at last, and the peace, instead of bringing 
us relief and progress, brought us repressive legislation and martial 
law in the Punjab. A bitter sense of humiliation and a passionate 
anger filled our people. All the unending talk of constitutional 
reform and Indianization of the services was a mockery and an 
insult when the manhood of our country was being crushed and the 
inexorable and continuous process of exploitation was deepening 
our poverty and sapping our vitality. We had become a derelict 
nation. 

Yet what could we do, how change this vicious process? We 
seemed to be helpless in the grip of some all-powerful monster; 
our limbs were paralysed, our minds deadened. The peasantry 
were servile and fear-ridden; the industrial workers were no better. 
The middle classes, the intelligentsia, who might have been 
beacon-lights in the enveloping darkness, were themselves sub- 
merged in this all-pervading gloom. In some ways their condition 
was even more pitiful than that of the peasantry. Large numbers 
of them, declasse intellectuals, cut off from the land and incapable 
of any kind of manual or technical work, joined the swelling army 
of the unemployed, and helpless, hopeless, sank ever deeper into 
the morass. A few successful lawyers or doctors or engineers or 
clerks made little difference to the mass. The peasant starved, yet 
centuries of an unequal struggle against his environment had taught 
him to endure, and even in poverty and starvation he had a certain 
calm dignity, a feeling of submission to an all-powerful fate. Not 
so the middle classes, more especially the new petty bourgeoisie, 
who had no such background. Incompletely developed and frustra- 
ted, they did not know where to look, for neither the old nor the 
new offered them any hope. There was no adjustment to social 
purpose, no satisfaction of doing something worthwhile, even though 
suffering came in its train. Custom-ridden, they were born old, 
yet they were without the old culture. Modern thought attracted 

357" 



them, but they lacked its inner content, the modern social and 
scientific consciousness. Some tried to cling tenaciously to the dead 
forms of the past, seeking relief from present misery in them. Rut 
there could be no relief there, for, as Tagore has said, we must not 
nourish in our being what is dead, for the dead is death-dealing. 
Others made themselves pale and ineffectual copies of the west. 
So, like derelicts, frantically seeking some foothold of security for 
body and mind and finding none, they floated aimlessly in the 
murky waters of Indian life. 

What could we do ? How could we pull India out of this quag- 
mire of poverty and defeatism which sucked her in? Not for a few 
years of excitement and agony and suspense, but for long genera- 
tions our people had offered their 'blood and toil, tears and sweat.' 
And this process had eaten its way deep into the body and soul of 
India, poisoning every aspect of our corporate life, like that fell 
disease which consumes the tissues of the lungs and kill slowly but 
inevitably. Sometimes we thought that some swifter and more 
obvious process, resembling cholera or the bubonic plague, would 
have been better; but that was a passing thought, for adventurism 
leads nowhere, and the quack treatment of deep-seated diseases 
does not yield results. 

And then Gandhi came. He was like a powerful current of fresh 
air that made us stretch ourselves and take deep breaths; like a 
beam of light that pierced the darkness and removed the scales 
from our eyes; like a whirlwind that upset many things, but most 
of all the working of people's minds. He did not descend from the 
top; he seemed to emerge from the millions of India, speaking their 
language and incessantly drawing attention to them and their appal- 
ling condition. Get off the backs of these peasants and workers, 
he told us, all you who live by their exploitation; get rid of the 
system that produces this poverty and misery. Political freedom took 
new shape then and acquired a new content. Much that he said we 
only partially accepted or sometimes did not accept at all. But all 
this was secondary. The essence of his teaching was fearlessness 
and truth, and action allied to these, always keeping the welfare 
of the masses in view. The greatest gift for an individual or a nation, 
so we had been told in our ancient books, was abhaya (fearlessness), 
not merely bodily courage but the absence of fear from the mind. 
Janaka and Yajnavalka had said, at the dawn of our history, that 
it was the function of the leaders of a people to make them fearless. 
But the dominant impulse in India under British rule was that of 
fear — pervasive, oppressing, strangling fear; fear of the army, the 
police, the widespread secret service; fear of the official class; 
fear of laws meant to suppress and of prison; fear of the landlord's 
agent; fear of the moneylender; fear of unemployment and starva- 
tion, which were always on the threshold. It was against this all- 
pervading fear that Gandhi's quiet and determined voice was 

358 



raised: Be not afraid. Was it so simple as all that? Not quite. 
And yet fear builds its phantoms which are more fearsome than 
reality itself, and reality, when calmly analysed and its consequences 
willingly accepted, loses much of its terror. 

So, suddenly, as it were, that black pall of fear was lifted from 
the people's shoulders, not wholly of course, but to an amazing 
degree. As fear is close companion to falsehood, so truth follows 
fearlessness. The Indian people did not become much more truthful 
than they were, nor did they change their essential nature over- 
night; nevertheless a sea-change was visible as the need for false- 
hood and furtive behaviour lessened. It was a psychological change, 
almost as if some expert in psycho-analytical methods had probed 
deep into the patient's past, found out the origins of his complexes, 
exposed them to his view, and thus rid him of that burden. 

There was that psychological reaction also, a feeling of shame at 
our long submission to an alien rule that had degraded and humi- 
liated us, and a desire to submit no longer whatevef the conse- 
quences might be. 

We did not grow much more truthful perhaps than we had 
been previously, but Gandhi was always there as a symbol of 
uncompromising truth to pull us up and shame us into truth. 
What is truth? I do not know for certain, and perhaps our truths 
are relative and absolute truth is beyond us. Different persons may 
and do take different views oftruth, and each individual is power- 
fully influenced by his own background, training, and impulses. 
So also Gandhi. But truth is at least for an individual what he him- 
self feels and knows to be true. According to this definition I do 
not know of any person who holds to the truth as Gandhi does. 
That is a dangerous quality in a politician, for he speaks out his 
mind and even lets the public see its changing phases. 

Gandhi influenced millions ofpeople in India in varying degrees. 
Some changed the whole texture of their lives, others were only 
partly affected, or the effect wore off; and yet not quite, for some 
part of it could not be wholly shaken off. Different people reacted 
differently and each will give his own answer to this question. 
Some might well say almost in the words of Alcibiades: 'Besides, 
when we listen to anyone else talking, however eloquent he is, 
we don't really care a damn what he says; but when we listen to 
you, or to someone else repeating what you've said, even if he puts 
it ever so badly, and never mind whether the person who is listen- 
ing is man, woman, or child, we're absolutely staggered and be- 
witched. And speaking for myself, gentlemen, if I wasn't afraid 
you'd tell me I was completely bottled, I'd swear on oath what an 
extraordinary effect his words have had on me — and still do, if 
it comes to that. For the moment I hear him speak I am smitten 
by a kind of sacred rage, worse than any Corybant, and my 
heart jumps into my mouth and the tears start into my eyes — 

359" 



Oh, and not only me, but lots of other men. 

'And there is one thing I've never felt with anybody else — not 
the kind of thing you would expect to find in me, either — and 
that is a sense of shame. Socrates is the only man in the world 
that can make me feel ashamed. Because there's no getting away 
from it, I know I ought to do the things he tells me to; and yet 
the moment I'm out of his sight I don't care what I do to keep in 
with the mob. So I dash off like a runaway slave, and keep out 
of his way as long as I can: and the next time I meet him I re- 
member all that I had to admit the time before, and naturally 
I feel ashamed 

'Yes, I have heard Pericles and all the other great orators, and 
very eloquent I thought they were; but they never affected me 
like that; they never turned my whole soul upside down and left 
me feeling as if I were the lowest of the low; but this latter day 
Maryas, here, has often left me in such a state of mind that I've 
felt I simply couldn't go on living the way I did.. .. 

'Only I've been bitten by something much more poisonous 
than a snake; in fact, mine is the most painful kind of bite there 
is. I've been bitten in the heart, or the mind or whatever you like 
to call it '* 

The Congress Becomes a Dynamic Organization 
under Gandhi's Leadership 

Gandhi for the first time entered the Congress organization and 
immediately brought about a complete change in its constitution. 
He made it democratic and a mass organization. Democratic it 
had been previously also but it had so far been limited in franchise 
and restricted to the upper classes. Now the peasants rolled in and, 
in its new garb, it began to assume the look of a vast agrarian 
organization with a strong sprinkling of the middle classes. This 
agrarian character was to grow. Industrial workers also came in 
but as individuals and not in their separate organized capacity. 
Action was to be the basis and, objective of this organization, 
action based on peaceful methods. Thus far the alternatives had 
been just talking and passing resolutions, or terroristic activity. 
Both of these were set aside and terrorism was especially conde- 
mned as opposed to the basic policy of the Congress. A new 
technique of action was evolved which, though perfectly peaceful, 
yet implied non-submission to what was considered wrong and, 
as a consequence, a willing acceptance of the pain and suffering 
involved in this. Gandhi was an odd kind of pacifist, for he was an 
activist full of dynamic energy. There was no submission in him to 
fate or anything that he considered evil; he was full of resistance, 
though this was peaceful and courteous. 

*From 'The Five Dialogues of Plato', Everyman's Library. 
360" 



The call of action was two-fold. There was, of course, the action 
involved in challenging and resisting foreign rule; there was also 
the action which led us to fight our own social evils. Apart from the 
fundamental objective of the Congress — the freedom of India — 
and the method of peaceful action, the principal planks of the 
Congress were national unity, which involved the solution of the 
minority problems, and the raising of the depressed classes and the 
ending of the curse of untouchability. 

Realizing that the main props of British rule were fear, prestige, 
the co-operation, willing or unwilling, of the people, and certain 
classes whose vested interests were centred in British rule, Gandhi 
attacked these foundations. Titles were to be given up and though 
the title-holders responded to this only in small measure, the popular 
respect for these British-given titles disappeared and they became 
symbols of degradation. New standards and values were set up 
and the pomp and splendour of the viceregal court and the princes, 
which used to impress so much, suddenly appeared supremely 
ridiculous and vulgar and rather shameful, surrounded as they 
were by the poverty and misery of the people. Rich men were not 
so anxious to flaunt their riches; outwardly at least many of them 
adopted simpler ways, and in their dress, became almost indistin- 
guishable from humbler folk. 

The older leaders of the Congress, bred in a different and more 
quiescent tradition, did not take easily to these new ways and were 
disturbed by the upsurge of the masses. Yet so powerful was the 
wave of feeling and sentiment that swept through the country, 
that some of this intoxication filled them also. A very few fell away 
and among them was Mr. M. A. Jinnah. He left the Congress not 
because of any difference of opinion on the Hindu-Moslem question 
but because he could not adapt himself to the new and more 
advanced ideology, and even more so because he disliked the crowds 
of ill-dressed people, talking in Hindustani, who filled the Congress. 
His idea of politics was of a superior variety, more suited to the 
legislative chamber or to a committee-room. For some years he 
felt completely out of the picture and even decided to leave India 
for good. He settled down in England and spent several years there. 

It is said, and I think with truth, that the Indian habit of mind 
is essentially one of quietism. Perhaps old races develop that 
attitude to life; a long tradition of philosophy also leads to it and 
yet Gandhi, a typical product of India, represents the very anti- 
thesis of quietism. He has been a demon of energy and action, a 
hustler, and a man who not only drives himself but drives others. 
He has done more than anyone I know to fight and change the 
quietism of the Indian people. 

He sent us to the villages, and the countryside hummed with the 
activity of innumerable messengers of the new gospel of action. 
The peasant was shaken up and he began to emerge from his 

3(il 



quiescent shell. The effect on us was different but equally far- 
reaching, for we saw, for the first time as it were, the villager in the 
intimacy of his mud-hut, and with the stark shadow of hunger 
always pursuing him. We learnt our Indian economics more from 
these visits than from books and learned discourses. The emotional 
experience we had already undergone was emphasized and con- 
firmed and henceforward there could be no going back for us to 
our old life or our old standards, howsoever much our views might 
change subsequently. 

Gandhi held strong views on economic, social, and other matters. 
He did not try to impose all of these on the Congress, though he 
continued to develop his ideas, and sometimes in the process varied 
them, through his writings. But some he tried to push into the 
Congress. He proceeded cautiously for he wanted to carry the people 
with him. Sometimes he went too far for the Congress and had to 
retrace his steps. Not many accepted his veiws in their entirety; 
some disagreed with that fundamental outlook. But many accepted 
them in the modified form in which they came to the Congress as 
being suited to the circumstances then existing. In two respects 
the background of his thought had a vague but considerable 
influence; the fundamental test of everything was how far it bene- 
fited the masses, and the means were always important and could 
not be ignored even though the end in view was right, for the means 
governed the end and varied it. 

Gandhi was essentially a man of religion, a Hindu to the 
inner-most depths of his being, and yet his conception of religion 
had nothing to do with any dogma or custom or ritual.* It was 
basically concerned with his firm belief in the moral law, which 
he calls the law of truth or love. Truth and non-violence appear 
to him to be the same thing or different aspects of one and the 
same thing, and he uses these words almost interchangeably. 
Claiming to understand the spirit of Hinduism, he rejects every 
text or practice which does not fit in with his idealist interpre- 
tation of what it should be, calling it an interpolation or a subse- 
quent accretion. '1 decline to be a slave,' he has said, 'to prece- 
dents or practice I cannot understand or defend on a moral basis.' 
And so in practice he is singularly free to take the path of his choice, 
to change and adapt himself, to develop his philosophy of life and 
action, subject only to the over-riding consideration of the moral 
law as he conceives this to be. Whether that philosophy is right 

*Gandhi told the Federation of International Fellowships in January, 1928, that 'After 
long study and experience I have come to these conclusions that: (1) all religions are true, 
(2) all religions have some error in them, (3) all religions are almost as dear to me as 
my own Hinduism. My veneration for other faiths is the same as for my own faith. 
Consequently, the thought of conversion is impossible... .Our prayer for others ought never 
to be: "God give them the light thou has given to me\" But: "Give them all the light 
and truth they need for their highest development!" ' 

362" 



or wrong, may be argued, but he insists on applying the same 
fundamental yard-stick to everything, and himself especially. In 
politics, as in other aspects of life, this creates difficulties for the 
average person, and often misunderstanding. But no difficulty 
makes him swerve from the straight line of his choosing, though 
within limits he is continually adapting himself to a changing 
situation. Every reform that he suggests, every advice that he 
gives to others, he straightway applies to himself. He is always 
beginning with himself and his words and actions fit into each 
other like a glove on the hand. And so, whatever happens, he 
never loses his integrity and there is always an organic completeness 
about his life and work. Even in his apparent failures he has seemed 
to grow in stature. 

What was his idea of India which he was setting out to mould 
according to his own wishes and ideals? 'I shall work for an India 
in which the poorest shall feel that it is their country, in whose 
making they have an effective voice, an India in which there shall 
be no high class and low class of people, an India in which all 
communities shall live in perfect harmony... .There can be no 
room in such an India for the curse of untouchability or the curse 

of intoxicating drinks and drugs Women will enjoy the same 

right as men... .This is the India of my dreams.' Proud of his 
Hindu inheritance as he was, he tried to give to Hinduism a kind 
of universal attire and included all religions within the fold of 
truth. He refused to narrow his cultural inheritance. 

'Indian culture,' he wrote, 'is neither Hindu, Islamic, nor any 
other, wholly. It is a fusion of all.' Again he said: 'I want the 
culture of all lands to be blown about my house as freely as pos- 
sible. But I refuse to be blown off my feet by any. I refuse to live 
in other peoples' houses as an interloper, a beggar, or a slave.' 
Influenced by modern thought currents, he never let go of his 
roots and clung to them tenaciously. 

And so he set about to restore the spiritual unity of the people 
and to break the barrier between the small westernized group at 
the top and the masses, to discover the living elements in the old 
roots and to build upon them, to waken these masses out of their 
stupor and static condition and make them dynamic. In his 
single-track and yet many-sided nature the dominating impres- 
sion that one gathered was his identification with the masses, 
a community of spirit with them, an amazing sense of unity with 
the dispossessed and poverty-stricken not only of India but of the 
world. Even religion, as everything else, took second place to his 
passion to raise these submerged people. A semi-starved nation 
can have neither religion, nor art nor organization.' 'Whatever 
can be useful to starving millions is beautiful to my mind. Let us 
give to-day first the vital things of life, and all the graces and orna- 
ments of life will follow. ... I want art and literature that can speak 

363" 



to millions.' These unhappy dispossessed millions haunted him 
and everything seemed to revolve round them. Tor millions it is 
an eternal vigil or an eternal trance.' His ambition, he said, was 
'to wipe every tear from every eye.' 

It is not surprising that this astonishingly vital man, full of 
self-confidence and an unusual kind of power, standing for equal- 
ity and freedom for each individual, but measuring all this in 
terms of the poorest, fascinated the masses of India and attracted 
them like a magnet. He seemed to them to link up the past with 
the future and to make the dismal present appear just as a step- 
ping-stone to that future oflife and hope. And not the masses only 
but intellectuals and others also, though their minds were often 
troubled and confused and the change-over for them from the 
habits of a lifetime was more difficult. Thus he effected a vast 
psychological revolution not only among those who followed his 
lead but also among his opponents and those many neutrals who 
could not make up their minds what to think and what to do. 

Congress was dominated by Gandhi and yet it was a peculiar 
domination, for the Congress was an active, rebellious, many- 
sided organization, full of variety of opinion, and not easily led 
this way or that. Often Gandhi toned down his position to meet 
the wishes of others, sometimes he accepted even an adverse 
decision. On some vital matters for him, he was adamant, and 
on more than one occasion there came a break between him and 
the Congress. But always he was the symbol of India's independ- 
ence and militant nationalism, the unyielding opponent of all 
those who sought to enslave her, and it was as such a symbol that 
people gathered to him and accepted his lead, even-though they 
disagreed with him on other matters. They did not always accept 
that lead when there was no active struggle going on, but when 
the struggle was inevitable that symbol became all important, 
and everything else was secondary. 

Thus in 1920 the National Congress, and to a large extent the 
country, took to this new and unexplored path and came into 
conflict repeatedly with the British power. The conflict was in- 
herent both in these methods and in the new situation that had 
arisen, yet back of all this was not political tactics and manoeuv- 
ring but the desire to strengthen the Indian people, for by that 
strength alone could they achieve independence and retain it. 
Civil disobedience struggles came one after the other, involving 
enormous suffering, but that suffering was self-invited and there- 
fore strength giving, not the kind which overwhelms the unwilling, 
leading to despair and defeatism. The unwilling also suffered, 
caught in the wide net of fierce governmental repression, and 
even the willing sometimes broke up and collapsed. But many 
remained true and steadfast, harder for all the experience they 
had undergone. At no time, even when its fortunes were low, did 

364" 



Congress surrender to superior might or submit to foreign autho- 
rity. It remained the symbol of India's passionate desire for inde- 
pendence and her will to resist alien domination. It was because 
of this that vast numbers of the Indian people sympathized with 
it and looked to it for leadership, even though many of them 
were so weak and feeble, or so circumstanced, as to be unable to 
do anything themselves. The Congress was a party in some ways; 
it has also been a joint platform for several parties; but essentially 
it was something much more, for it represented the innermost 
desire of vast numbers of our people. The number of members 
on its rolls, large as this was, was only a feeble reflection of its 
widespread representative character for membership depended not 
on the people's desire to join but on our capacity to reach remote 
villages. Often (as now) we have been an illegal organisation, not 
existing at all in the eyes of the law, and our books and papers 
have been taken away by the police. 

Even when there was no civil disobedience struggle going on, 
the general attitude of non-co-operation with the British appa- 
ratus of government in India continued, though it lost its aggres- 
sive character. That did not mean, of course, non-co-operation 
with Englishmen as such. When Congress governments were 
installed in many provinces, there was inevitably much co-opera- 
tion in official and governmental work. Even then, however, that 
background did not change much and instructions were issued 
regulating the conduct of Congressmen, apart from official duties. 
Between Indian nationalism and an alien imperialism there could 
be no final peace, though temporary compromises and adjustments 
were sometimes inevitable. Only a free India could co-operate with 
England on equal terms. 

Congress Governments in the Provinces 

The British Parliament, after some years of commissions, com- 
mittees, and debates, passed a Government of India Act in 1935. 
This provided for some kind of provincial autonomy and a federal 
structure, but there were so many reservations and checks that 
both political and economic power continued to be concentrated 
in the hands of the British Government. Indeed in some ways it 
confirmed and enlarged the powers of an executive responsible 
solely to that Government. The federal structure was so envisaged 
as to make any real advance impossible, and no loophole was left 
for the representatives of the Indian people to interfere with or 
modify the system of British-controlled administration. Any change 
or relaxation of this could only come through the British Parlia- 
ment. Thus, reactionary as this structure was, there were not even 
any seeds in it of self-growth, short of some kind of revolutionary 
action. The Act strengthened the alliance between the British 

365" 



Government and the princes, landlords, and other reactionary 
elements in India; it added to the separate electorates, thus increas- 
ing the separatist tendencies; it consolidated the predominant 
position of British trade, industry, banking, and shipping and laid 
down statutory prohibitions against any interference with this 
position, any 'discrimination,' as it was called;* it retained in 
British hands complete control over Indian finance, military, and 
foreign affairs; it made the Viceroy even more powerful than he 
had been. 

In the limited sphere of provincial autonomy the transfer of 
authority was, or appeared to be, much greater. Nevertheless, the 
position of a popular government was extraordinary. There were 
all the checks of viceregal powers and an irresponsible central 
authority, and even the Governor of the province, like the Viceroy, 
could intervene, veto, legislate on his own sole authority, and do 
almost anything he wanted even in direct opposition to the popular 
ministers and the provincial legislature. A great part of the re- 
venues were mortgaged to various vested interests and could not be 
used. The superior services and the police were protected and could 
hardly be touched by the ministers. They were wholly authori- 
tarian in outlook and looked, as of old, to the Governor for gui- 
dance and not to the ministers. And yet these were the very people 
through whom the popular government had to function. The 
whole complicated structure of government remained as it was, 
from the Governor down to the petty official and policeman; only 
somewhere in the middle a few ministers, responsible to a popu- 
larly elected legislature, were thrust in to carry on as best they 
could. If the Governor (who represented British authority) and 
the services under him agreed and fully co-operated with the 
ministers, the apparatus of government might function smoothly. 
Otherwise — and this was much more likely, as the policy and 
methods of a popular government differed entirely from the old 
authoritarian police-state ways — there was bound to be continuous 
friction. Even when the Governor or the services were not openly 
at variance with or disloyal to the policy of the popular govern- 
ment, they could obstruct, delay, pervert, and undo what that 
Government did or wished to do. In law there was nothing to 
prevent the Governor and the Viceroy from acting as they liked, 
even in active opposition to the ministry and the legislature; the 

'The removal of these statutory prohibitions is still fiercely resisted by representatives of 
British industry and trade in India. In April, 1945, a resolution demanding this removal 
was passed in the Central Assembly in spite of British opposition. Indian nationalism, and 
indeed all Indian parties and groups are strongly in favour of this removal, and of course 
Indian industrialists are most anxious about it. Andyet, it is significant to note that Indian 
businessmen in Ceylon are demanding exactly the same kind of protection in Ceylon which 
they rightly resent having been given to British business interests in India. Self-interest not 
only blinds one to justice andf air play but also to the simplest applications of logic and reason. 

366" 



only real check was fear of conflict. The ministers might resign, 
no others could command a majority in the legislature, and popular 
upheavals might follow. It was the old constitutional conflict 
between an autocratic king and parliament which had so often taken 
place elsewhere, leading to revolutions and the suppression of 
the king. Here the king was in addition a foreign authority, 
supported by foreign military and economic power and the special 
interests and lap-dog breed it had created in the country. 

About this time also Burma was separated from India. In 
Burma there had been a conflict between British and Indian 
and, to some extent, Chinese, economic and commerical interests. 
It had therefore been British policy to encourage anti-Indian 
and anti-Chinese sentiments among the Burmese people. This 
policy was helpful for sometimes, but when it was joined on to a 
denial of freedom to the Burmese, it resulted in creating the power- 
ful pro-Japanese movements in Burma which came to the surface 
when the Japanese attacked in 1942. 

The Act of 1935 was bitterly opposed by all sections of Indian 
opinion. While the part dealing with provincial autonomy was 
severely criticized for its many reservations and the powers given 
to the Governors and the Viceroy, the federal part was even more 
resented. Federation as such was not opposed and it was generally 
recognized that a federal structure was desirable for India, but 
the proposed federation petrified British rule and vested interests 
in India. Only the provincial autonomy part of it was applied and 
the Congress decided to contest elections. But the question whe- 
ther responsibility for provincial governments should be under- 
taken, within the terms of the Act, led to fierce debate within the 
Congress. The success of the Congress in the elections was over- 
whelming in most of the provinces, but still there was hesitation 
in accepting ministerial responsibility unless it was made clear 
that there would be no interference by the Governor or Viceroy. 
After some months vague assurances were given to this effect and 
Congress governments were established in July, 1937. Ultimately 
there were such governments in eight of the eleven provinces, the 
three remaining ones being Sind, Bengal, and Punjab. Sind was 
a small, newly-created, and rather unstable province. In Bengal 
the Congress had the largest single party in the legislature, but as 
it was not in a majority, it did not participate in the Government. 
Bengal (or rather, Calcutta) being the principal headquarters of 
British capital in India, the European commercial element has 
been given astonishingly heavy representation. In numbers they 
are a mere handful (some thousands) and yet they have been 
given twenty-five seats as compared to the fifty seats for the general 
non-Moslem population consisting of about seventeen millions 
(apart from the scheduled castes) of the whole province. This 
British group in the legislature thus plays an important part 

367" 



in Bengal politics and can make or unmake ministries. 

The Congress could not possibly accept the Act of 1935 as even 
a temporary solution of the Indian problem. It was pledged to 
independence and to combat the Act. Yet a majority had decided 
to work provincial autonomy. It had thus a dual policy: to carry 
on the struggle for independence and at the same time to carry 
through the legislatures constructive measures of reform. The 
agrarian question especially demanded immediate attention. 

The question of Congressmen joining other groups to form 
coalition governments was considered, although there was no 
necessity for this as the Congress had clear majorities. Still it 
was desirable to associate as many people as possible in the work 
of government. There was nothing inherently wrong about coali- 
tions at all times, and indeed some form of coalition was agreed 
to in the Frontier Province and in Assam. As a matter of fact, 
the Congress itself was a kind of coalition or joint front of various 
groups tied together by the dominating urge for India's inde- 
pendence. In spite of this variety within its fold, it had developed 
a discipline, a social outlook, and a capacity to offer battle in its 
own peaceful way. A wider coalition meant a joining up with 
people whose entire political and social outlook was different, 
and who were chiefly interested in office and ministerships. 
Conflict was inherent in the situation, conflict with the repre- 
sentatives of British interests — the Viceroy, the Governor, the 
superior services; conflict also with vested interests in land and 
industry over agrarian questions and workers' conditions. The 
non-Congress elements were usually politically and socially con- 
servative; some ofthem were pure careerists. If such elements enter- 
ed government, they might tone down our whole social programme, 
or at any rate obstruct and delay it. There might even be intrigues 
with the Governor over the heads of the other ministers. A joint 
front against British authority was essential. Any breach in this 
would be harmful to our cause. There would have been no binding 
cement, no common loyalty, no united objective, and individual 
ministers would have looked and pulled in different directions. 

Our public life naturally included many who could be called 
politicians and nothing more, careerists, both in the good and 
bad sense of the word. There were able, earnest, and patriotic 
men and women, as well as careerists, both in the Congress and 
in other organizations. But the Congress had been, ever since 
1920, something much more than a constitutional political party, 
and the breath of revolutionary action, actual or potential, sur- 
rounded it and often put it outside the pale of the law. The 
fact that this action was not connected with violence, secret 
intrigue, and conspiracy, the usual accompaniments of revolu- 
tionary activity, did not make it any the less revolutionary. 
Whether it was right or wrong, effective or not, may be an 

368" 



arguable matter, but it is manifest that it involved cold-blooded 
courage and endurance of a high order. Perhaps it is easier to 
indulge in short violent spurts of courage, even unto death, than 
to give up, under the sole compulsion of one's own mind, almost 
everything that life offers and carry on in this way day after day, 
month after month, year after year. That is a test which few 
can survive anywhere and it is surprising that so many in India 
have stood it successfully.. 

The Congress parties in the legislatures were anxious to pass 
legislative measures in favour of the peasants and workers as 
soon as possible before some crisis overwhelmed them. That 
sense of impending crisis was always present; it was inherent 
in the situation. In nearly all the provinces there were second 
chambers elected on a very limited franchise and thus represent- 
ing vested interests in land and industry. There were also other 
checks to progressive legislation. Coalition governments would 
add to all these difficulties and it was decided not to have them 
•to begin with, except in Assam and the Frontier. 

This decision was itself by no means final and the possibility 
of change was kept in view, but rapidly developing circum- 
stances made any change more difficult and the Congress govern- 
ments in the provinces became entangled in the numerous pro- 
blems that urgently demanded solution. In subsequent years 
there has been much argument about the wisdom of that decsiion 
and opinions have differed. It is easy to be wise after the event, 
but I am still inclined to think that politically, and situated as 
we were then, it was a natural and logical decision for us. Never- 
theless it is true that the consequences of it on the communal 
question were unfortunate and it led to a feeling of grievance 
and isolation among many Moslems. This played into the hands 
of reactionary elements who utilized it to strengthen their own 
position among certain groups. 

Politically and constitutionally, the new Act and the establish- 
ment of Congress governments in the provinces made no vital 
difference to the British structure of government. Real power 
remained where it had so long been. But the psychological change 
was enormous and an electric current seemd to run through the 
countryside. This change was noticeable more in the rural areas 
than in the cities, though in the industrial centres the workers 
also reacted in the same way. There was a sense of immense relief 
as of the lifting of a weight which had been oppressing the people; 
there was a release of long-suppressed mass energy which was 
evident everywhere. The fear of the police and secret service 
vanished for a while at least and even the poorest peasant added 
to his feeling of self-respect and self-reliance. For the first time 
he felt that he counted and could not be ignored. Government 
was no longer an unknown and intangible monster, separated 

369" 



from him by innumerable layers of officials, whom he could not 
easily approach and much less influence, and who were bent on 
extracting as much out of him as possible. The seats of the mighty 
were now occupied by men he had often seen and heard and 
talked to; sometimes they had been in prison together and there 
was a feeling of comradeship between them. 

At the headquarters of the provincial governments, in the very 
citadels of the old bureaucracy, many a symbolic scene was wit- 
nessed. These provincial secretariats, as they were called, where 
all the high offices were congregated, had been the holy of holies 
of government, and out of them issued mysterious orders which 
none could challenge. Policemen and red-liveried orderlies, with 
shining daggers thrust in their waistbands, guarded the precincts, 
and only those who were fortunate or greatly daring or had a long 
purse, could pass them. Now, suddenly, hordes of people, from 
the city and the village, entered these sacred precincts and roamed 
about almost at will. They were interested in everything; they 
went into the Assembly Chamber, where the sessions used to be 
held; they even peeped into the Ministers' rooms. It was difficult 
to stop them for they no longer felt as outsiders; they had a sense 
of ownership in all this, although it was all very complicated for 
them and difficult to understand. The policemen and orderlies 
with shining daggers were paralysed; the old standards had fallen; 
European dress, symbol of position and authority, no longer 
counted. It was difficult to distinguish between members of the 
legislatures and the peasants and townsmen who came in such 
large numbers. They were often dressed more or less alike, mostly 
in handspun cloth with the well-known Gandhi cap on their 
heads. 

It had been very different in the Punjab and in Bengal where 
ministries had come into existence several months earlier. 
There had been no impasse there and the change-over had taken 
place quietly without ruffling the surface of life in any way. 
In the Punjab especially the old order continued and most of the 
ministers were not new. They had been high officials previously 
and they continued to be so. Between them and the British 
administration there was no conflict or sense of tension, for 
politically that administration was supreme. 

This difference between the Congress provinces and Bengal 
and Punjab was immediately apparent in regard to civil liberties 
and political prisoners. In both Bengal and Punjab there was 
no relaxation of the police and secret service raj, and political 
prisoners were not released. In Bengal, where the ministry often 
depended on European votes, there were in addition thousands 
of detenus, that is, men and women kept indefinitely for years 
and years in prison without charge or trial. In the Congress 
provinces, however, the very first step taken was the release of 

370" 



political prisoners. In regard to some of these, who had been 
convicted for violent activities, there was delay because of the 
Governor's refusal to agree. Matters came to a head early in 1938 
over this issue and two of the Congress Governments (United 
Provinces and Bihar) actually offered their resignations. There- 
upon the Governor withdrew his objections and the prisoners 
were released. 

Indian Dynamism versus British Conservatism in India 

The new provincial assemblies had a much larger representation 
from the rural areas and this inevitably led to a demand in all 
of them for agrarian reforms. In Bengal, because of the perma- 
nent settlement and for other reasons, the condition ofthe tenantry 
was worst of all. Next came the other big zamindari (landlord) 
provinces, chiefly Bihar and the United Provinces, and thirdly 
the provinces where originally some kind of peasant proprietor- 
ship had been established (Madras, Bombay, Punjab, etc.), but 
where big landed estates had also grown up. The permanent 
settlement came in the way of any effective reform in Bengal. 
Almost everybody is agreed that this must go, and even an official 
commission has recommended it, but vested interests still manage 
to prevent or delay change. The Punjab was fortunate in having 
fresh land at its disposal. 

For the Congress the agrarian question was the dominating 
social issue and much time had been given to its study and the 
formulation of policy. This varied in different provinces as con- 
ditions were different and also the class composition of the pro- 
vincial Congress organizations, differed from one another. There 
was an all-India agrarian policy which had been formulated by 
the central organization and each province added to it and filled 
in the details. The United Provinces Congress was in this respect 
the most advanced and it had reached the conclusion that the 
zamindari (landlord) system should be abolished. This, however, 
was impossible under the Government of India Act of 1935, even 
apart from the special powers of the Viceroy and the Governor, 
and the second chamber which largely consisted of the landed 
class. Changes had thus to be made within the larger framework 
of this system, unless of course some revolutionary upheaval ended 
that system itself. This made reform difficult and terribly compli- 
cated and it took much longer than was anticipated. 

However, substantial agrarian reforms were introduced and 
the problem of rural indebtedness was also attacked. So also 
labour conditions in factories, public health and sanitation, local 
seif-government, education both in the lower stages and in the 
university, literacy, industry, rural development, and many other 
problems were tackled. All these social, cultural, and economic 

371" 



problems had been ignored and neglected by previous govern- 
ments, their function had been to make the police and the revenue 
departments efficient and to allow the rest to take their own 
course. Occasionally some little effort had been made and com- 
missions and inquiry committees had been appointed, which 
produced huge reports after years of labour and travelling about. 
Then the reports had been put away in their respective pigeon- 
holes and little was done. Even proper statistics had not been 
collected, in spite of insistent popular demand. This lack of 
statistics and surveys and necessary information had been a 
serious impediment in the way of progress in any direction. 
Thus the new provincial governments had, apart from the nor- 
mal work of administration, to face a mountain of work, the 
result of years of neglect, and on every side urgent problems 
faced them. They had to change a police-state into a socially- 
guided state — never an easy job but made much more difficult 
by the limitation on their power, the poverty of the people, and 
the divergence of outlook between these provincial governments 
and the central authority, which was completely autocratic and 
authoritarian, under the Viceroy. 

We knew all these limitations and barriers, we realized in our 
hearts that we could not do much till conditions were radically 
changed — hence our overwhelming desire for independence — 
and yet the passion for progress filled us and the wish to emulate 
other countries which had gone so far ahead in many ways. We 
thought of the United States of America and even of some eastern 
countries which were forging ahead. But most of all we had the 
example of the Soviet Union which in two brief decades, full of 
war and civil strife and in the face of what appeared to be insur- 
mountable difficulties, had made tremendous progress. Some 
were attracted to communism, others were not, but all were 
fascinated by the advance of the Soviet Union in education 
and culture and medical care and physical fitness and in the 
solution of the problem of nationalities — by the amazing and 
prodigious effort to create a new world out of the dregs of the 
old. Even Rabindranath Tagore, highly individualistic as he 
was and not attracted towards some aspects of the communistic 
system, became an admirer of this new civilization and contrasted 
it with present conditions in his own country. In his last death-bed 
message he referred to the 'unsparing energy with which Russia 
has tried to fight disease and illiteracy, and has succeeded in steadily 
liquidating ignorance and poverty, wiping off the humiliation 
from the face of a vast continent. Her civilization is free from all 
invidious distinction between one class and another, between one 
sect and another. The rapid and astounding progress achieved 
by her made me happy and jealous at the same time... .When 
I see elsewhere some 200 nationalities — which only a few years 

372" 



ago were at vastly different stages of development — marching 
ahead in peaceful progress and amity, and when I look about my 
own country and see a very highly evolved and intellectual people 
drifting into the disorder of barbarism, I cannot help contrasting 
the two systems of governments, one based on co-operation, the 
other on exploitation, which have made such contrary conditions 
possible.' 

If others could do it, why not we? We had faith in our capacity, 
our intelligence, our will to persevere, to endure and succeed. 
We knew the difficulties, our poverty and backwardness, our 
reactionary groups and classes, our divisions; yet we would face 
them and overcome them. We knew that the price was a heavy 
one, but we were prepared to pay it, for no price could be greater 
than what we paid from day to day in our present condition. But 
how were we to begin on our internal problems when the external 
problem of British rule and occupation faced us at every turn and 
nullified our every effort? 

Yet since we had some opportunity, however limited and restric- 
ted, in these provincial governments, we wanted to take advantage 
of it in the fullest measure. But it was a heart-breaking job for 
our ministers, who were overwhelmed with work and responsibility, 
and could not even share this with the permanent services, because 
of the lack of harmony and the absence of a common outlook. 
Unfortunately also, the number of these ministers was much too 
small. They were supposed to set an example in plain living and 
economy in public expenditure. Their salaries were small, and 
we had the curious spectacle of a minister's secretary or some 
other subordinate belonging to the Indian Civil Service drawing a 
salary and allowances which were four or five times the minister's 
salary. We could not touch the emoluments of the Civil Service. 
Also the minister would travel second-class by railway train, or 
even third, while some subordinate of his might be travelling first 
or in a lordly saloon in the same train. 

It has often been stated that the central Congress Executive 
continually interfered with the work of these provincial govern- 
ments by issuing orders from above. This is entirely incorrect, 
and there was no interference with the internal administration. 
What the Congress Executive desired was that a common policy 
on all fundamental political matters should be followed by the 
provincial governments, and that the Congress programme, as 
laid down in the election manifesto, should be furthered in so 
far as this was possible. In particular, the policy vis-a-vis the 
governors and the Government of India had to be uniform. 

The introduction of provincial autonomy without any change 
in the central government, which continued to be wholly irres- 
ponsible and authoritarian, was likely to lead to a growth of 
provincialism and diversity, and thus to a lessening of the sense 

373" 



of Indian unity. Probably the British Government had this in 
view in furtherance of its policy of encouraging disruptive elements 
and tendencies. The Government of India, irremovable, irresponsi- 
ble, and unresponsive, still representing the old tradition of British 
imperialism, stood as solid as a rock, and, of course, pursued a 
uniform policy with all the provincial governments. The Gover- 
nors, acting on instructions from New Delhi or Simla did likewise. 
If the Congress provincial governments had reacted differently 
from this, each in its own way, they could have been disposed of 
separately. It was essential, therefore, for these provincial govern- 
ments to hold together and present a united front to the Govern- 
ment of India. The Government of India, on the other hand, was 
equally anxious to prevent this co-operation, and preferred to deal 
with each provincial government separately without reference to 
similar problems elsewhere. 

In August, 1937, soon after the formation of the Congress provin- 
cial governments, the Congress Executive passed the following 
resolution: 

'The Working Committee recommend to the Congress minis- 
ters the appointment of a committee of experts to consider urgent 
and vital problems, the solution of which is necessary to any scheme 
of national reconstruction and social planning. Such solution will 
require extensive surveys and the collection of data, as well as a 
clearly-defined social objective. Many of these problems cannot 
be dealt with efficiently on a provincial basis, and the interests of 
adjoining provinces are interlinked. Comprehensive river 
surveys are necessary for the formulation of a policy to prevent 
disastrous floods, to utilise the water for the purposes of irrigation, 
to consider the problem of soil erosion, to eradicate malaria, and 
for the development of hydro-electric and other schemes. For this 
purpose the whole river valley will have to be surveyed and 
investigated, and large-scale state planning resorted to. The develop- 
ment and control of industries require also joint and co-ordinate 
action on the part of several provinces. The Working Committee 
advise therefore that, to begin with, an inter-provincial committee 
of experts be appointed to consider the general nature of the 
problems to be faced, and to suggest how, and in what order, 
those should be tackled. This expert committee may suggest the 
formation of special committees or boards to consider each such 
problem separately, and to advise the provincial governments con- 
cerned as to the joint action to be undertaken.' 

This resolution indicates the kind of advice that was sometimes 
tendered to the provincial governments. It shows also how desirous 
the Congress Executive was to encourage co-operation between 
provincial governments in the economic and industrial sphere. 
That co-operation was not limited to the Congress governments, 
although the advice was neces sarily addressed to them. A compre- 

374" 



hensive river survey overlapped provincial boundaries; a survey 
of the Gangetic valley and the setting up of a Ganga River 
Commission (a work of the highest importance which yet 
awaits to be done) could only take place with the co-operation 
of the three provincial governments — those of the United Pro- 
vinces, Bihar, and Bengal. 

The resolution also demonstrates the importance attached by 
the Congress to large-scale state planning. Such planning was 
impossible so long as the central government was not under 
popular control and the shackles on the provincial governments 
had not been removed. We hoped, however, that some essential 
preliminary work might be done and the foundations for future 
planning laid down. Unfortunately, the provincial governments 
were so busy with their own problems that there was delay in 
giving effect to this resolution. Late in 1938 a National Plan- 
ning Committee was constituted, and I became chairman of it. 

I was often critical of the work of the Congress Governments 
and fretted at the slowness of progress made; but, looking back, 
I am surprised at their achievements during a brief period of 
two years and a quarter, despite the innumerable difficulties 
that surrounded them. Unfortunately, some of their important 
work did not bear fruit, as it was on the point of completion 
when they resigned, and it was shelved afterwards by their succes- 
sor — that is, the British Governor. Both the peasantry and 
industrial labour benefited and grew in strength. One of the 
most important and far-reaching achievements was the introduc- 
tion of a system of mass education called basic education. This 
was not only based on the latest educational doctrine but was 
peculiarly suited to Indian conditions. 

Every vested' interest came in the way of progressive change. 
A committee appointed by the United Provinces Government to 
inquire into labour conditions in the Cawnpore textile industry 
was treated by the employers (chiefly Europeans but including 
some Indians) with the greatest discourtesy, and many of the 
facts and figures demanded were refused. Labour had long faced 
the organized opposition of both the employers and Govern- 
ment, and the police had always been at the disposal of the 
employers. The change in policy introduced by the Congress 
Governments was therefore resented by the employers. Of the 
tactics of employers in India, Mr. B. Shiva Rao, who has had 
long experience of the Labour movement in India and belongs 
to the moderate wing of it, writes: 'The amount of resourceful- 
ness and lack of scruple exhibited on such occasions (strikes etc.) 
by the employers with the assistance of police would be incredi- 
ble to one unacquainted with Indian conditions.' The govern- 
ment of most countries, constituted as it is, inclines towards the 
employers. In India, Mr. Shiva Rao points out, there is an addi- 

375" 



tional reason for this. 'Apart from personal animosities, officials 
in India with rare exceptions have been obsessed with the fear 
that trade unions, if allowed to develop, would foster mass con- 
sciousness; and with the political struggle in India periodically 
flaring up into movements like non-co-operation and civil disobe- 
dience, they have felt presumably that no risks should be taken 
in regard to the organization of the masses.'* 

Governments lay down policy, legislatures pass laws; but the 
actual working out of this policy and the application of these 
laws depend ultimately on the services and the administrative 
personnel. The provincial governments had thus inevitably to 
rely on the permanent services, especially the Indian civil service 
and the police. These services, bred in a different and authori- 
tarian tradition, disliked the new atmosphere, the assertive 
attitude of the public, the lessening of their own importance, 
and their subordination to persons whom they had been in the 
habit of arresting and imprisoning. They had been rather 
apprehensive at first as to what might happen. But nothing 
very revolutionary happened and they gradually settled down 
to their old rountine. It was not easy for the ministers to inter- 
fere with the man on the spot and only in obvious cases could 
they do so. The services formed a close corporation and hung 
together, and if one man was transferred, his successor was likely 
to act in the same way. It was impossible to change suddenly 
the old reactionary and autocratic mentality of the services as a 
whole. A few individuals might change, some might make an 
effort to adapt themselves to the new conditions, but the vast 
majority of them thought differently and had always functioned 
differently; how could they undergo a sea-change and emerge 
as crusaders of a new order? At the most they could give a 
passive and heavy-moving loyalty; there could not, in the very 
nature of things, be a flaming enthusiasm for the new kind of 
work to be done, in which they did not believe and which under- 
mined their own vested interests. Unfortunately even this passive 
loyalty was often lacking. 

Among the higher members of the civil service, long accustom- 
ed to authoritarian methods and unchecked rule, there was a 
feeling that these ministers and legislators were intruders in a 
domain reserved for them. The old conception that they, the 
permanent services and especially the British element in them, 
were India and all others were unimportant appendages, died 
hard. It was not easy to suffer the new-comers, much less to 
take orders from them. They felt as an orthodox Hindu might 
feel if untouchables pushed their way into the sacred precincts 
of his own particular temple. The edifice of prestige and racial 

*B. Shiva Rao: 'The Industrial Worker in India' (London, 1939). 
376" 



superiority which had been built with so much labour, and which 
had almost become a religion to them, was cracking. The Chinese 
are said to be great believers in 'face,' and yet I doubt if any 
among them are so passionately attached to 'face' as the British 
in India. For the latter it is not only individual, racial, and 
national prestige; it is also intimately connected with their rule 
and vested interests. 

Yet the intruders had to be tolerated, but the toleration grew 
progressively less as the sense of danger receded. This attitude 
permeated all departments of the administration, but it was 
especially in evidence away from headquarters, in the districts, 
and in matters relating to, what is called, Law and Order, which 
was the special preserve of the district magistrate and the police. 
The emphasis of the Congress governments on civil liberty gave 
the local officials and the police an excuse for allowing things to 
happen which, ordinarily, no government could have permitted. 
Indeed I am convinced that in some cases the initiative for 
these undesirable occurrences came from the local officials 
or the police. Many of the communal (religious) riots that took 
place were due to a variety of causes, but the magistrates and the 
police were certainly not always free from guilt. Experience showed 
that a quick and efficient handling of the situation put an end to 
the trouble. What we saw repeatedly was an astonishing slackness 
and a deliberate evasion of duty. It became obvious that the 
objective was to discredit the Congress governments. In the 
Provinces, the industrial city of Cawnpore offered the most glaring 
example of utter ineptitude and mismanagement on the 
part of the local officials, which could only be deliberate. Com- 
munal (religious) friction, leading sometimes to local riots, had been 
more in evidence in the late twenties and early thirties. After the 
Congress governments took office it was in many ways much less. 
It changed its nature and became definitely political and deliberately 
encouraged and organized. 

The civil service had a reputation, chiefly self-propagated, for 
efficiency. But it became evident that outside the narrow sphere 
of work to which they had been accustomed, they were helpless 
and incompetent. They had no training to function democrati- 
cally and could not gain the goodwill and co-operation of the 
people, whom they both feared and despised; they had no con- 
ception of big and fast-moving schemes of social progress and 
could only hamper them by their red-tape and lack of imagina- 
tion. Apart from certain individuals, this applied to both British 
and Indian members of the higher services. It was extraordinary 
how unfitted they were for the new tasks that faced them. 

There was, of course, a great deal of inefficiency and incom- 
petence on the popular side. But it was counterbalanced by 
energy and enthusiasm, and close touch with masses, and a 

377" 



desire and capacity to learn from one's own mistakes. There was 
vitality there, a bubbling life, a sense of tension, a desire to get 
things done, all of which contrasted strangely with the apathy 
and conservatism of the British ruling class and their supporters. 
India, the land of tradition, thus offered a strange picture of reversal 
of roles. The British, who had come here as representatives of a 
dynamic society, were now the chief upholders of a static, unchang- 
ing tradition; among the Indians there were many who represented 
the new dynamic order and were eager for change, change not 
only political but also social and economic. Behind those Indians 
there were, of course, vast new forces at work which perhaps even 
they hardly realized. This reversal of roles was a demonstration 
of the fact that whatever creative or progressive role the British 
might have played in the past in India, they had long ceased to 
play it, and were now a hindrance and an obstruction to all progress. 
The tempo of their official life was slow and incapable of solving 
any of the vital problems before India. Even their utterances, 
which used to have some clarity and strength, became turgid, inept, 
and lacking any real content. 

There has long been a legend, propagated by British authori- 
ties, that the British Government, through its higher services in 
India, was training us for the difficult and intricate art of self- 
government. We had managed to carry on, and with a consi- 
derable degree of success, for a few thousand years before the 
British came here and gave us the advantage of their training. 
No doubt we lack many of the good qualities that we should 
possess, and some misguided persons e.ven say that this deficiency 
has grown under British rule. But whatever our failings might 
be, it seemed obvious to us that the permanent services here 
were totally incapable of leading India in any progressive direc- 
tion. The very qualities they possessed made them unhelpful, 
for the qualities necessary in a police state are utterly different 
from those required in a progressive democratic community. 
Before they could presume to train others, it would be necessary 
for them to untrain themselves, and to bathe in the waters of 
Lethe so that they might forget what they had been. 

The odd position of a popular provincial government with 
an autocratic central government over it brought out many 
strange contrasts. The Congress governments were anxious to 
preserve civil liberties and they checked the wide-flung activities 
of the provincial C.I.D. (Criminal Investigation Department) 
whose chief function had been to shadow politicians and all 
those who were suspected of anti-government sentiments. While 
these activities were checked, the Imperial C.I.D. continued to 
function, probably with greater energy. Not only were our letters 
censored, but even the ministers' correspondence was sometimes 
subjected to this, though it was done quietly and not officially 

378" 



admitted. During the last quarter of a century or more 
I have not written a single letter, which has been posted in 
India, either to an Indian, or a foreign address, without realiz- 
ing that it would be seen, and possibly copied, by some secret 
service censor. Nor have I spoken on the telephone without 
remembering that my conversation was likely to be tapped. The 
letters that have reached me also have had to pass some censor. 
This does not mean that every single letter is always censored; 
sometimes this has been done, at other times selected ones are 
examined. This has nothing to do with the war, when there is 
a double censorship. 

Fortunately we have functioned in the open and there has 
been nothing to hide in our political activities. Nevertheless 
this feeling of being subjected to continuous censorship, to prying 
and tapping and overhearing, is not a pleasant one. It irritates 
and oppresses and even comes in the way ofpersonal relationships. 
It is not easy to write as one would like to, with the censor peering 
over one's shoulder. 

The ministers worked hard and many of them broke down 
under the strain. Their health deteriorated and all the freshness 
faded away, leaving them haggard and utterly weary. But a sense 
of purpose kept them going and they made their Indian civil 
service secretaries and their staffs work hard also; the lights in 
their offices were on till late in the evening. When the Congress 
governments resigned early in November, 1939, there was many 
a sigh of relief; the government offices were henceforth closed 
punctually at four in the afternoon, and reverted to their pre- 
vious aspect of cloistered chambers where quiet prevailed and 
the public was not welcomed. Life went back to its old routine 
and slow tempo, and the afternoons and evenings were free for 
polo and tennis and bridge and the amenities of club life. A 
bad dream had faded and business and play could now be carried 
on as in the old days. True, there was a war on, thus far only in 
Europe, and Poland had been crushed by Hitler's legions. But 
all this was far away, and anyway it was a phoney war. While 
soldiers did their duty and fought and died, here also duty had 
to be performed and this duty was to bear the white man's burden 
worthily and with dignity. 

The brief period during which the Congress governments 
functioned in the provinces confirmed our belief that the major 
obstruction to progress in India was the political and economic 
structure imposed by the British. It was perfectly true that many 
traditional habits and social forms and practices were barriers to 
progress and they had to go. Yet the inherent tendency of Indian 
economy to expand was not restricted so much by these forms and 
habits as by the political and economic stranglehold of the British. 
But for that steel framework, expansion was inevitable, bringing 

379" 



in its wake many social changes and the ending of out-worn customs 
and ceremonial patterns. Hence attention had to be concentrated 
on the removal of that framework, and the energy spent on other 
matters bore little result and was often like ploughing the sands. 
That framework was itself based on and protected the semi-feudal 
land tenure system and many other relics of the past. Any kind 
of democracy in India was incompatible with the British political 
and economic structure, and conflict between the two was inevi- 
table. Hence the partial democracy of 1937-39 was always on the 
verge of conflict. Hence also the official British view that demo- 
cracy in India had not been successful, because they could only 
consider it in terms of maintaining the structure and values and 
vested interests they had built up. As the kind of tame and sub- 
servient democracy of which they could have approved was not 
forthcoming, and all manner of radical changes were aimed at, 
the only alternative left to the British power was to revert to a 
purely authoritarian regime and put an end to all pretensions of 
democracy. There is a marked similarity in the development of 
this outlook and the birth and growth of fascism in Europe. 
Even the rule of law on which the British had prided themselves 
in India gave place to something in the nature of a state of siege 
and rule by ordinance and decree. 

The Question of Minorities 
The Moslem League: Mr. M. A. Jinnah 

The development and growth of the Moslem League during the 
last seven years has been an unusual phenomenon. Started in 
1906 with British encouragement and in order to keep away the 
new generation of Moslems from the National Congress, it re- 
mained a small upper-class organization controlled by feudal 
elements. It had no influence on the Moslem masses and was 
hardly known by them. By its very constitution it was limited to 
a small group and a permanent leadership which perpetuated 
itself. Even so, events and the growing middle class among the 
Moslems pushed it in the direction of the Congress. World War 
I and the fate of the Turkish Khilafat (Caliphate) and the Moslem 
holy places produced a powerful impression on the Moslems of 
India and made them intensely anti-British. The Moslem League, 
constituted as it was, could not offer any guidance or leadership 
to these awakened and excited masses; indeed the League suffered 
from an attack of nerves and practically faded away. A new Moslem 
organization grew up inc lose co-operation with the Congress — 
the Khilafat Committee. Large numbers of Moslems also joined 
the Congress and worked through it. After the first non-co-opera- 
tion movement of 1920-23, the Khilafat Committee also began to 
fade away as its very raison d'etre had disappeared — the Turkish 

380" 



Khilafat. The Moslem masses drifted away from political activity, 
as also the Hindu masses to a lesser extent. But a very consider- 
able number of Moslems, chiefly of the middle classes, continued 
to function through the Congress. 

During this period a number of petty Moslem organizations 
functioned spasmodically, often coming into conflict with each 
other. They had no mass affiliations, no political importance 
except such as was given to them by the British Government. 
Their chief function was to demand special privileges and pro- 
tection for the Moslems in the legislatures and services. In this 
matter they did represent a definite Moslem viewpoint, for there 
was a background of resentment and fear among the Moslems 
at the superior position of the Hindus in education, services, and 
industry, as well as in numbers. Mr. M. A. Jinnah retired from 
Indian politics, and indeed from India, and settled down in England. 

During the second Civil Disobedience movement of 1930 the 
response from the Moslems was very considerable, though less than 
in 1920-23. Among those who were jailed in connection with this 
movement there were at least 10,000 Moslems. The North-West 
Frontier Province, which is an almost entirely Moslem province 
(95 per cent Moslems) played a leading and remarkable part in 
this movement. This was largely due to the work and personality 
of Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the unquestioned and beloved 
leader of the Pathans in this province. Of all the remarkable 
happenings in India in recent times, nothing is more astonishing 
than the way in which Abdul Ghaffar Khan made his turbulent 
and quarrelsome people accept peaceful methods of political 
action, involving enormous suffering. That suffering was indeed 
terrible and has left a trail of bitter memories; and yet their discip- 
line and self-control were such that no act of violence was committed 
by the Pathans against the Government forces or others opposed 
to them. When it is remembered that a Pathan loves his gun more 
than his brother, is easily excited, and has long had a reputation 
for killing at the slightest provocation, this self-discipline appears 
little short of miraculous. 

The Frontier Province, under Abdul Ghaffar Khan's leadership, 
stood firmly by the side of the National Congress, so also did a 
large number of the politically conscious middle-class Moslems 
elsewhere. Among the peasantry and workers, Congress influence 
was considerable, especially in provinces like the United Provinces, 
which had an advanced agrarian and workers programme. But it 
was none the less true that the Moslem masses as a whole were 
reverting vaguely to their old local and feudal leadership, which 
came to them in the guise of protectors of Moslem interests as 
against Hindus and others. 

The communal problem, as it was called, was one of adjusting 
the claims of the minorities and giving them sufficient protection 

381" 



from majority action. Minorities in India, it must be remembered, 
are not racial or national minorities as in Europe; they are religious 
minorities. Racially India is a patchwork and a curious mixture, 
but no racial questions have arisen or can arise in India. Religion 
transcends these racial differences, which fade into one another 
and are often hard to distinguish. Religious barriers are obviously 
not permanent, as conversions can take place from one religion 
to another, and a person changing his religion does not thereby 
lose his racial background or his cultural and linguistic inheritance. 
Latterly religion, in any real sense of the word, has played little 
part in Indian political conflicts, though the word is often enough 
used and exploited. Religious differences, as such, do not come in 
the way, for there is a great deal of mutual tolerance for them. In 
political matters, religion has been displaced by what is called 
communalism, a narrow group mentality basing itself on a religious 
community but in reality concerned with political power and 
patronage for the interested group. 

Repeated efforts were made by the Congress as well as other 
organizations to settle this communal problem with the consent 
of the various groups concerned. Some partial success was achieved 
but there was always a basic difficulty — the presence and policy 
of the British Government. Naturally the British did not favour any 
real settlement which would strengthen the political movement — 
now grown to mass proportions — against them. It was a triangle 
with the Government in a position to play off one side against the 
other, by giving special privileges. If the other parties had been 
wise enough, they could have overcome even this obstacle, but they 
lacked wisdom and foresight. Whenever a settlement was almost 
reached, the Government would take some step which upset the 
balance. 

There was no dispute about the usual provisions for minority 
protection, such as the League of Nations used to lay down. All 
those were agreed to and much more. Religion, culture, language, 
the fundamental rights of the individual and the group, were all 
to be protected and assured by basic constitutional provisions in 
a democratic constitution applying equally to all. Apart from this, 
the whole history of India was witness of the toleration and even 
encouragement of minorities and of different racial groups. There 
is nothing in Indian history to compare with the bitter religious 
feuds and persecutions that prevailed in Europe. So we did not have 
to go abroad for ideas of religious and cultural toleration; these 
were inherent in Indian life. In regard to individual and political 
rights and civil liberties, we were influenced by the ideas of the 
French and American revolutions, as also by the constitutional 
history ofthe British Parliament. Socialistic ideas, and the influence 
of the Soviet revolution, came in later to give a powerful economic 
turn to our thoughts. 

382" 



.Apart from full protection of all such rights ofthe individual 
and the group, it was common ground that every effort should 
be made by the state as well as by private agencies to remove all 
invidious social and customary barriers which came in the way of 
the full development ofthe individual as well as any group, and 
that educationally and economically backward classes should be 
helped to get rid of their disabilities as rapidly as possible. This 
applied especially to the depressed classes. It was further laid down 
that women should share in every way with men in the privileges 
of cit izenship. 

What remained? Fear that bigger numbers might politically 
overwhelm a minority. Normally speaking, numbers meant the 
peasantry and the workers, the masses of all religious faiths, who 
had long been exploited not only by foreign rule but by their own 
upper classes. Having assured the protection of religion and culture, 
etc., the major problems that were bound to come up were economic 
ones which had nothing to do with a person's religion. Class 
conflicts there might well be but not religious conflicts, except in 
so far as religion itself represented some vested interest. Neverthe- 
less people had grown so accustomed to think along lines of religious 
cleavage, and were continually being encouraged to do so by 
communal religious organizations and Government action, that 
the fear of the major religious community, that is the Hindus, 
swamping others continued to exercise the minds of many Moslems. 
It was not clear how even a majority could injure the interests of 
a huge minority like the Moslems, concentrated mostly in certain 
parts ofthe country, which would be autonomous. But fear is not 
reasonable. 

Separate electorates for Moslems (and later for other and smaller 
groups) were introduced and additional seats were given to them 
in excess of their population. But even excess in representation in 
a popular assembly could not convert a minority into a majority. 
Indeed separate electorates made matters a little worse, for the 
protected group for the majority electorate lost interest in it, and 
there was little occasion for mutual consideration and adjustment 
which inevitably takes place in a joint electorate when a candi- 
date has to appeal to every group. The Congress went further and 
declared that if there was any disagreement between the majority 
and a religious minority on any issue touching the special interests 
of that minority, it should not be decided by majority votes but 
should be referred to an impartial judicial tribunal, or even an 
international tribunal, whose decision should be final. 

It is difficult to conceive what greater protection could be given 
to any religious minority or group under any democratic system. 
It must be remembered also that in some provinces Moslems were 
actually in a majority and as the provinces were autonomous, 
the Moslem majority was more or less free to function as it chose, 

383" 



subject only to certain all-India considerations. In the central 
government Moslems would also inevitably have an important 
share. In the Moslem majority provinces this communal-religious 
problem was reversed, for there protection was demanded by the 
other minority groups (such as Hindu and Sikh) as against the 
Moslem majority. Thus in the Punjab there was a Moslem-Hindu- 
Sikh triangle. If there was a separate electorate for Moslems then 
others claimed special protection for themselves also. Having 
once introduced separate electorates there was no end to the 
ramifications and compartments and difficulties that arose from 
them. Obviously the granting of weightage in representation to 
one group could only be done at the cost of some other group, 
which had its representation reduced below its population figures. 
This produced a fantastic result, especially in Bengal, where, 
chiefly because of excessive European representation, the seats 
allotted to the general electorate were absurdly reduced. Thus 
the intelligentsia of Bengal, which had played such a notable part 
in Indian politics and the struggle for freedom, suddenly realized 
that it had a very weak position in the provincial legislature fixed 
and limited by statute. 

The Congress made many mistakes, but these were in rela- 
tively minor questions of approach or tactics. It was obvious 
that even for purely political reasons the Congress was eager and 
anxious to bring about a communal solution and thus remove a 
barrier to progress. There was no such eagerness in the purely 
communal organizations, for their chief reason for existence was 
to emphasize the particular demands of their respective groups, 
and this had led to a certain vested interest in the status quo. Though 
predominantly Hindu in membership, the Congress had large 
numbers of Moslems on its rolls, as well as all other religious 
groups like Sikhs, Christians, etc. It was thus forced to think in 
national terms. For it the dominating issue was national freedom 
and the establishment of an independent democratic state. It 
realized that in a vast and varied country like India, a simple type 
of democracy, giving full powers to a majority to curb or overrule 
minority groups in all matters, was not satisfactory or desirable, 
even if it could be established. It wanted unity, of course, and took 
it for granted, but it saw no reason why the richness and variety 
of India's cultural life should be regimented after a single pattern. 
Hence a large measure of autonomy was agreed to, as well as safe- 
guards for cultural growth and individual and group freedom. 

But on two fundamental questions the Congress stood firm: 
national unity and democracy. These were the foundations on 
which it had been founded and its very growth for half a century 
had emphasized these. The Congress organization is certainly 
one of the most democratic organizations that I know of any- 
where in the world, both in theory and practice. Through its 

384" 



tens of thousands of local committees spread out all over the 
country, it had trained the people in democratic ways and 
achieved striking success in this. The fact that a dominating and 
very popular personality like Gandhi was connected with it, did 
not lessen that essential democracy of the Congress. In times 
of crisis and struggle there was an inevitable tendency to look 
to the leader for guidance, as in every country, and such crises 
were frequent. Nothing is more absurd than to call the Congress 
an authoritarian organization, and it is interesting to note that 
such charges are usually made by high representatives of British 
authority, which is the essence of autocracy and authoritarianism 
in India. 

The British Government had also stood in the past, in theory 
at least, for Indian unity and democracy. It took pride in the 
fact that its rule had brought about the political unity of India, 
even though that unity was one of common subjection. It told 
us further that it was training us in the methods and processes 
of democracy. But curiously enough its policy has directly led 
to the denial of both unity and democracy. In August, 1940, 
the Congress Executive was compelled to declare that the policy 
of the British Government in India 'is a direct encouragement 
of and incitement to civil discord and strife.' Responsible spokes- 
men of the British Government began to tell us openly that perhaps 
the unity of India might have to be sacrificed in favour of some 
new arrangement, and that democracy was not suited to India. 
That was the only answer they had left to India's demand for 
independence and the establishment of a democratic state. That 
answer, incidentally, tells us that the British have failed, on their 
own showing, in the two major objectives they had set themselves 
in India. It took them a century and a half to realize this. 

We failed in finding a solution for the communal problem 
agreeable to all parties concerned, and certainly we must share 
the blame as we have to shoulder the consequences for this failure. 
But how does one get everybody to agree to any important proposi- 
tion or change? There are always feudal and reactionary elements 
who are opposed to all change, and there are those who want 
political, economic, and social change; in between these are varying 
groups. If a small group can exercise a veto on change then surely 
there can never be any change. When it is the policy of the ruling 
power to set up such groups and encourage them, even though 
they may represent an infinitesimal proportion of the population, 
then change can only come through successful revolution. It i3 
obvious that there are any number of feudal and reactionary 
groups in India, some native to the soil and some created and 
nurtured by the British. In numbers they may be small but they 
have the backing of the British power. 

Among the Moslems various organizations grew up, apart 

385" 



from the Moslem League. One of the older and more important 
ones was the Jamiat-ul-Ulema which consisted of divines and 
old-fashioned scholars from all over India. Traditional and con- 
servative in its general outlook, and necessarily religious, it was 
yet politically advanced and anti-imperialist. On the political 
plane it often co-operated with the Congress and many of its 
members were also members of the Congress and functioned 
through its organization. The Ahrar organization was founded 
later and was strongest in the Punjab. This represented chiefly 
lower middle-class Moslems and had considerable influence on 
the masses also in particular areas. The Momins (principally the 
weaver class), though large in numbers, were the poorest and 
most backward among the Moslems and were weak and badly 
organized. They were friendly to the Congress and opposed to 
the Moslem League. Being weak they avoided political action. 
In Bengal there was the Krishak (peasant) Sabha. Both the Jamiat- 
ul-Ulema and the Ahrars often co-operated with the Congress in 
its normal work and its more aggressive campaigns against the 
British Government, and suffered for it. The chief Moslem organiza- 
tion which has never come into conflict, other than verbal, with 
the British authorities, is the Moslem League, which throughout 
subsequent changes and developments and even when large num- 
bers joined it, never shed its upper class feudal leadership. 

There were also the Shia Moslems organized separately, but 
rather vaguely, chiefly for the purpose of making political demands. 
In the early days of Islam, in Arabia, a bitter dispute about the 
succession to the Khilafat led to a schism and two groups or sects 
emerged — the Sunnis and Shias. That quarrel perpetuated itself 
and still separates the two, though the schism ceased to have any 
political meaning. Sunnis are in a majority in India and in the 
Islamic countries, except in Iran, where Shias are in a majority. 
Religious conflicts have sometimes taken place between the two 
groups. The Shia organization in India as such kept apart and 
differed from the Moslem League. It was in favour ofjoint electo- 
rates for all. But there are many prominent Shias in the League. 

All these Moslem organizations, as well as some others (but 
not including the Moslem League) joined hands to promote the 
Azad Muslim Conference, which was a kind ofjoint Moslem 
front opposed to the Moslem League. This conference held a 
very representative and successful first session in Delhi in 1940. 

The chief Hjndu communal organization is the Hindu Maha- 
sabha, the counterpart of the Moslem League, but relatively 
less important. It is as aggressively communal as the League, 
but it tries to cover up its extreme narrowness of outlook by 
using some kind of vague national terminology, though its out- 
look is more revivalist than progressive. It is peculiarly unfor- 
tunate in some of its leaders who indulge in irresponsible and 
386" 



violent diatribes, as indeed do some of the Moslem League leaders 
also. This verbal warfare, indulged in on both sides, is a constant 
irritant. It takes the place of action. 

The Moslem League's communal attitude was often difficult 
and unreasonable in the past, but no less unreasonable was the 
attitude of the Hindu Mahasabha. The Hindu minorities in the 
Punjab and Sind, and the dominant Sikh group in the Punjab, 
were often obstructive and came in the way of a settlement. British 
policy was to encourage and emphasize these differences and to 
give importance to communal organizations as against the Congress. 

One test of the importance of a group or party, or at any rate 
of its hold on the people, is an election. During the general elec- 
tions in India in 1937 the Hindu Mahasabha failed completely; 
it was nowhere in the picture. The Moslem League did better 
but on the whole its showing was poor, especially in the pre- 
dominantly Moslem provinces. In the Punjab and Sind it failed 
completely, in Bengal it met with only partial success. In the 
North-West Frontier Province Congress formed a ministry later. 
In the Moslem minority provinces, the League met with greater 
success on the whole, but there were also independent Moslem 
groups as well as Moslems elected as Congressmen. 

Then began a remarkable campaign on behalf of the Moslem 
League against the Congress governments in the provinces and 
the Congress organization itself. Day after day it was repeated 
that the governments were committing 'atrocities' on the Moslems. 
The governments contained Moslem ministers also but they were 
not members of the Moslem League. What these 'atrocities' were it 
was not usually stated, or some petty local incidents, which had 
nothing to do with the government, were distorted and magnified. 
Some minor errors of some departments, which were soon rectified, 
became 'atrocities'. Sometimes entirely false and baseless charges 
were made. Even a report was issued, fantastic in its contents and 
having little to do with any facts. Congress governments invited 
those who made the charges to supply particulars for investigation 
or to come and inquire themselves with government help. No 
one took advantage of these offers. But the campaign continued 
unchecked. Early in 1940, soon after the resignation of the Con- 
gress ministers, the then Congress president, Dr. Rajendra Prasad 
wrote to Mr. M. A. Jinnah and also made a public statement 
inviting the Moslem League to place any charges against the 
Congress governments before the federal court of inquiry and 
decision. Mr. Jinnah declined this offer and referred to the possibi- 
lity of a Royal Commission being appointed for the purpose. 
There was no question of any such commission being appointed 
and only the British Government could do so. Some of the British 
governors, who had functioned during the regime of the Congress 
governments declared publicly that they had found nothing objec- 

387" 



tionable in the treatment of minorities. Under the Act of 1935 
they had been especially empowered to protect minorities if any 
such need arose. 

I had made a close study of nazi methods of propaganda Since 
Hitler's rise to power and I was astonished to find something 
very similar taking place in India. A year later, in 1938, when 
Czechoslovakia had to face the Sudetenland crisis, the nazi methods 
employed there were studied and referred to with approval by 
Moslem League spokesmen. A comparison was drawn between 
the position of Sudetenland Germans and Indian Moslems. 
Violence and incitements in speeches and in some newspapers 
became marked. A Congress Moslem minister was stabbed and 
there was no condemnation of this from any Moslem League leader; 
in fact it was condoned. Other exhibitions of violence frequently 
took place. 

I was terribly depressed by these developments and by the 
general lowering of the standards of public life. Violence, vul- 
garity, and irresponsibility were on the increase, and it appeared 
that they were approved of by responsible leaders of the Moslem 
League. I wrote to some of these leaders and begged them to 
check this tendency but with no success. So far as the Congress 
governments were concerned, it was obviously to their interest 
to win over every minority or other group and they tried hard 
to do so. Indeed complaints arose from some quarters that they 
were showing undue favour to the Moslems at the expense of 
other groups. But it was not a question of a particular griev- 
ance which could be remedied, or a reasonable consideration of 
any matter. There was a regular campaign on the part of members 
or sympathisers of the Moslem League to make the Moslem masses 
believe that something terrible was happening and that the Congress 
was to blame. What that terrible thing was nobody seemed to 
know. But surely there must be something behind all this shouting 
and cursing, if not here then elsewhere. During by-elections the 
cry raised was 'Islam in danger' and voters were asked to take 
their oaths on the holy book to vote for the Moslem League can- 
didate. 

All this had an undoubted effect on the Moslem masses. And 
yet it is surprising how many resisted it. The League won most 
by-elections, lost some; even when they won, there was a sub- 
stantial minority of Moslem voters who went against them, being 
influenced more by the Congress agrarian programme. But for 
the first time in its history the Moslem League got a mass back- 
ing and began to develop into a mass organization. Much as I 
regretted what was happening, I welcomed this development in 
a way as I thought that it might lead ultimately to a change 
in the feudal leadership and that more progressive elements 
would come forward. The real difficulty thus far had been the 

388" 



extreme political and social backwardness of the Moslems which 
made them liable to exploitation by reactionary leaders. 

Mr. M. A. Jinnah himself was more advanced than most of 
his colleagues of the Moslem League. Indeed he stood head and 
shoulders above them and had therefore become the indispens- 
able leader. From public platforms he confessed his great dis- 
satisfaction with the opportunism, and sometimes even worse 
failings, of his colleagues. He knew well that a great part of 
the advanced, selfless, and courageous element among the Mos- 
lems had joined and worked with the Congress. And yet some 
destiny or course of events had thrown him among the very 
people for whom he had no respect. He was their leader but 
he could only keep them together by becoming himself a prisoner 
to their reactionary ideologies. Not that he was an unwilling 
prisoner, so far as the ideologies were concerned, for despite his 
external modernism, he belonged to an older generation which 
was hardly aware of modern political thought or development. Of 
economics, which overshadow the world to-day, he appeared to 
be entirely ignorant. The extraordinary occurrenqes that had 
taken place all over the world since World War I had apparently 
had no effect on him. He had left the Congress when the organiza- 
tion had taken a political leap forward. The gap had widened as 
the Congress developed an economic and mass outlook. But Mr. 
Jinnah seemed to have remained ideologically in that identical 
place where he stood a generation ago, or rather he had gone 
further back, for now he condemned both India's unity and demo- 
cracy. 'They would not live,' he has stated, 'under any system 
of government that was based on the nonsensical notion of western 
democracy.' It took him a long time to realize that what he 
had stood for throughout a fairly long life was nonsensical. 

Mr. Jinnah is a lone figure even in the Moslem League, keep- 
ing apart from his closest co-workers, widely but distantly 
respected, more feared than liked. About his ability as a poli- 
tician there is no doubt, but somehow that ability is tied up with 
the peculiar conditions of British rule in India to-day. He shines 
as a lawyer-politician, as a tactician, as one who thinks that he holds 
the balance between nationalist India and the British power. If 
conditions were different and he had to face real problems, politi- 
cal, and economic, it is difficult to say how far his ability would 
carry him. Perhaps he is himself doubtful of this, although he has 
no small opinion of himself. This may be an explanation for that 
subconscious urge in him against change, to keep things going as they 
are, and to avoid discussion and the calm consideration of problems 
with people who do not wholly agree with him. He fits into this 
present pattern; whether he or anybody else will fit into a new 
pattern it is difficult to say. What passion moves him, what objec- 
tive does he strive for? Or is it that he has no dominating passion 

389" 



except the pleasure he has in playing a fascinating political game of 
chess in which he often has an opportunity to say 'check'? He 
seems to have a hatred for the Congress which has grown with 
the years. His aversions and dislikes are obvious, but what does 
he like? With all his strength and tenacity, he is a strangely 
negative person whose appropriate symbol might well be a 'no'. 
Hence all attempts to understand his positive aspect fail and one 
cannot come to grips with it. 

Since British rule came to India, Moslems have produced few 
outstanding figures of the modern type. They have produced 
some remarkable men but, as a rule, these represented the conti- 
nuation of the old culture and tradition and did not easily fit 
in with modern developments. This incapacity to march with 
the changing times and adapt themselves culturally and other- 
wise to a new environment was not of course due to any innate 
failing. It derived from certain historical causes, from the delay 
in the development of a new industrial middle class, and the 
excessively feudal background of the Moslems, which blocked 
up avenues of development and prevented the release of talent. 
In Bengal the backwardness of the Moslems was most marked, 
but this was obviously due to two causes: the destruction of 
their upper classes during the early days of British rule, and 
the fact that the vast majority were converts from the lowest 
class of Hindus, who had long been denied opportunities of 
growth and progress. In northern India the cultured upper-class 
Moslems were tied up with their old traditional ways as well as 
the land system. In recent years there has been a marked change 
and a fairly rapid development of a new middle class among 
Indian Moslems, but even now they lag far behind Hindus and 
others in science and industry . The Hindus are backward also, 
sometimes even more hide-bound and tied up with traditional 
ways of thought and practice than the Moslems, but nevertheless 
they have produced some very eminent men in science, industry, 
and other fields. The small Parsee community has also produced 
outstanding leaders of modern industry. Mr. Jinnah's family, 
it is interesting to note, was originally Hindu. 

Both among Hindus and Moslems a good deal of talent and 
ability has in the past gone into government service, as that was 
the most attractive avenue open. With the growth of the political 
movement for freedom, that attraction became less, and able, 
earnest, and courageous persons were drawn into the Congress. 
Thus many of the best types of Moslems came in to it. In more 
recent years young Moslems joined the socialist and communist 
parties also. Apart from all these ardent and progressive persons, 
Moslems were very poor in the quality of their leaders and were 
inclined to look to government service alone for advancement. 
Mr. Jinnah was a different type. He was able, tenacious, and 

390" 



not open to the lure of office, wlych had been such a failing of so 
many others. His position in the Moslem League, therefore, 
became unique and he was able to command the respect which 
was denied to many others prominent in the League. Unfortunately 
his tenacity prevented him from opening his mind to any new 
ideas, and his unquestioned hold on his own organization made 
him intolerant both of his own dissidents and of other organizations. 
He became the Moslem League. But a question arose: As the League 
was becoming a mass organization, how long could this feudal 
leadership with outmoded ideas continue? 

When I was Congress president, I wrote to Mr. Jinnah on 
several occasions and requested him to tell us exactly what he 
would like lis to do. I asked him what the League wanted and 
what its definite objectives were. I also wanted to know what 
the grievances of the League were against the Congress govern- 
ments. The idea was that we might clarify matters by corres- 
pondence and then discuss personally the important points that 
had arisen in it. Mr. Jinnah sent me long replies but failed to 
enlighten me. It was extraordinary how he avoided telling me, 
or anyone else, exactly what he wanted or what the grievances 
of the League were. Repeatedly we exchanged letters and yet 
always there was the same vagueness and inconclusiveness and 
I could get nothing definite. This surprised me very much and 
made me feel a little helpless. It seemed as if Mr. Jinnah did 
not want to commit himself in any way and was not at all eager 
for a settlement. 

Subsequently Gandhiji and others amongst us met Mr. Jinnah, 
several times. They talked for hours but never got beyond a 
preliminary stage. Our proposal was that representatives of the 
Congress and the League should meet and discuss all their mutual 
problems. Mr. Jinnah said that this could only be done after we 
recognized publicly that the Moslem League was the sole representa- 
tive organization of the Moslems of India, and the Congress should 
consider itself a purely Hindu organization. This created an 
obvious difficulty. We recognized of course the importance of 
the League and because of that we had approached it. But how 
could we ignore many other Moslem organizations in the country, 
some closely associated with us? Also there were large numbers 
of Moslems in the Congress itself and in our highest executive. To 
admit Mr Jinnah's claim meant in effect to push out our old 
Moslem colleagues from the Congress "and declare that the Con- 
gress was not open to them. It was to change the fundamental 
character of the Congress, and from a national organization, open 
to all, convert it into a communal body. That was inconceivable 
for us. If the Congress had not already been there, we would have 
had to build up a new national organization open to every Indian. 

We could not understand Mr. Jinnah's insistence on this and 

391" 



refusal to discuss any other matter. Again we could only con- 
clude that he did not want any settlement, nor did he want to 
commit himself in any way. He was satisfied in letting matters 
drift and in expecting that he could get more out of the British 
Government this way. 

Mr. Jinnah's demand was based on a new theory he had recently 
propounded — that India consisted of two nations, Hindu and 
Moslem. Why only two I do not know, for if nationality was 
based on religion, then there were many nations in India. Of two 
brothers one may be a Hindu, another a Moslem; they would 
belong to two different nations. These two nations existed in 
varying proportions in most of the villages of India. They were 
nations which had no boundaries; they overlapped. A Bengali 
Moslem and a Bengali Hindu living together, speaking the same 
language, and having much the same traditions and customs, 
belonged to different nations. All this was very difficult to grasp; 
it seemed a reversion to some medieval theory. What a nation is 
it is difficult to define. Possibly the essential characteristic of 
national consciousness is a sense of belonging together and of 
together facing the rest of mankind. How far that is present in 
India as a whole may be a debatable point. It may even be said 
that India developed in the past as a multi-national state and 
gradually acquired a national consciousness. But all these are 
theoretical abstractions which hardly concern us. To-day the 
most powerful states are multi-national, but at the same time 
developing a national consciousness, like the U.S.A. or the U.S.S.R. 

From Mr. Jinnah's two-nation theory developed the concep- 
tion of Pakistan, or splitting up of India. That, of course, did 
not solve the problem of the 'two nations,' for they were all over 
the place. But that gave body to a metaphysical conception. 
This again gave rise to a passionate reaction among many in 
favour of the unity of India. Ordinarily national unity is taken 
for granted. Only when it is challenged or attacked, or attempts 
are made to disrupt it, is unity really appreciated, and a posi- 
tive reaction to maintain it takes place. Thus sometimes attempts 
at disruption actually help to weld that unity. 

There was a fundamental difference between the outlook of 
the Congress and that of the religious-communal organizations. 
Of the latter the chief were the Moslem League and its Hindu 
counterpart, the Hindu Mahasabha. These communal organiza- 
tions, while in theory standing for India's independence, were 
more interested in claiming protection and special privileges for 
their respective groups. They had thus inevitably to look to the 
British Government for such privileges, and this led them to avoid 
conflict with it. The Congress outlook was so tied up with India's 
freedom as a united nation that everything else was secondary, 
and this meant ceaseless conflict or friction with the British power. 

392" 



Indian nationalism, as represented by the Congress, opposed 
British imperialism. The Congress had further developed agrarian, 
economic, and social programmes. Neither the Moslem League 
nor the Hindu Mahasabha had ever considered any such question 
or attempted to frame a programme. Socialists and communists 
were,' of course, intensely interested in such matters and had their 
own programmes, which they tried to push in the Congress as well 
as outside. 

There was yet another marked difference between Congress 
policy and work and those of the religious-communal organiza- 
tions. Quite apart from its agitational side and its legislative 
activity, when such existed, the Congress laid the greatest stress 
on certain constructive activities among the masses. These activi- 
ties consisted in organizing and developing cottage industries, 
in raising the depressed classes, and later in the spread of basic 
education. Village work also included sanitation and some simple 
forms of medical relief. Separate organizations for carrying on 
these activities were created by the Congress, which functioned 
apart from the political plane, and which absorbed thousands of 
whole-time workers and a much larger number of part-time 
helpers. This quiet non-political, constructive work was carried 
on even when political activities were at a low ebb; but even this 
was suppressed by Government when there was open conflict 
with the Congress. The economic value of some of these activities 
was questioned by a few people, but there could be no doubt of 
their social importance. They trained a large body of whole-time 
workers in intimate touch with the masses, and produced a spirit of 
self-help and self-reliance among the people. Congressmen and 
women also played an important part in trade union and agrarian 
organizations, actually building up many of these. The largest and 
best-organized trade union — that of the Ahmedabad textile 
industry — was started by Congressmen and worked in close co- 
operation with them. 

All these activities gave a solid background to Congress work, 
which was completely lacking in the religious-communal organi- 
zations. These latter functioned on the agitational plane only 
by fits and starts, or during elections. In them also was lacking 
that ever-present sense of risk and personal danger from govern- 
ment action which Congressmen had almost always to face. Thus, 
there was a far greater tendency for careerists and opportunists 
to enter these organizations. The two Moslem organizations, 
the Ahrars and the Jamiat-ul-Ulema, however, suffered greatly 
from governmental repression because politically they often 
followed the same line as the Congress. 

The Congress represented not only the nationalist urge of India, 
which had grown with the growth of the new bourgeoisie, but also, 
to a large extent, proletarian urges for social change. In particular, 

393" 



it stood for revolutionary agrarian changes. This sometimes pro- 
duced inner conflicts within the Congress, and the landlord class 
and the big industrialists, though often nationalistic, kept aloof 
from it for fear of socialistic changes. Within the Congress, socialists 
and communists found a place and could influence Congress policy. 
The communal organizations, whether Hindu or Moslem, were 
closely associated with the feudal and conservative elements and 
were opposed to any revolutionary social change. The real conflict 
had, therefore, nothing to do with religion, though religion often 
masked the issue, but was essentially between those who stood for a 
nationalist — democratic — socially revolutionary policy and those 
who were concerned with preserving the relics of a feudal regime. 
In a crisis, the latter inevitably depend upon foreign support which 
is interested in preserving the status quo. 

The beginning of World War II brought an internal crisis 
which resulted in the resignation of the Congress governments 
in the provinces. Before this occurred, however, the Congress 
made another attempt to approach Mr. M. A. Jinnah and the 
Moslem League. Mr. Jinnah was invited to attend the first meet- 
ing of the Congress Executive after the commencement of the 
war. He was unable to join us. We met him later and tried to 
evolve a common policy in view of the world crisis. Not much 
progress was made but nevertheless we decided to continue our 
talks. Meanwhile the Congress governments resigned on the 
political issue which had nothing to do with the Moslem League 
and the communal problem. Mr. Jinnah, however, chose that 
moment for a fierce attack on the Congress and a call on his 
League for the observance of a 'Day of Deliverance' from Con- 
gress rule in the provinces. He followed this up by very un- 
becoming remarks on Nationalist Moslems in the Congress and 
especially on the Congress president, Maulana Abul Kalam 
Azad, who was greatly respected among Hindus and Moslems 
alike. The 'Day of Deliverance' was rather a flop and counter 
demonstrations among Moslems took place in some parts of India. 
But it added to bitterness and confirmed the conviction that Mr. 
Jinnah and the Moslem League under his leadership had no 
intention whatever of coming to any settlement with the Congress, 
or of advancing the cause of Indian freedom. They preferred the' 
existing situation.* 



* After I had finished writing this book, I read a book by a Canadian scholar, Wilfrid 
Cantwell Smith, who has spent some years in Egypt and India. This book, which is 
called 'Modern Islam in India — A Social Analysis, (Lahore, 1943), is an able analysis 
and careful survey of the development of ideas among Indian Moslems since the Indian 
Mutiny of 1857. He deals with the progressive and reactionary movements from Sir 
Syed Ahmad Khan 's time onwards, and the different phases of the Moslem League. 

394" 



The National Planning Committee 

Towards the end of 1938 a National Planning Committee was 
constituted at the instance of the Congress. It consisted of fifteen 
members plus representatives of provincial governments and 
such Indian states as chose to collaborate with us. Among the 
members were well-known industrialists, financiers, economists, 
professors, scientists, as well as representatives of the Trade 
Union Congress and the Village Industries Association. The 
non-Congress Provincial Governments (Bengal, Punjab' and 
Sind), as well as some of the major states (Hyderabad, Mysore, 
Baroda, Travancore, Bhopal) co-operated with this committee. 
In a sense it was a remarkably representative committee cutting 
across political boundaries as well as the high barrier between 
official and non-official India — except for the fact that the Gov- 
ernment of India was not represented and took up a non-co- 
operative attitude. Hard-headed big business was there as well 
as people who are called idealists and doctrinaires, and socialists 
and near-communists. Experts and directors of industries came 
from provincial governments and states. 

It was a strange assortment of different types and it was not 
clear how such an odd mixture would work. I accepted the chair- 
manship of the committee not without hesitation and misgiving; 
the work was after my own heart and I could not keep out of it. 

Difficulties faced us at every turn. There were not enough 
data for real planning and few statistics were av lilable. The 
Government of India was not helpful. Even the provincial gov- 
ernments, though friendly and co-operative, did not seem to be 
particularly keen on all-India planning and took only a distant 
interest in our work. They were far too busy with their own problems 
and troubles. Important elements in the Congress, under whose 
auspices the committee had come into existence, rather looked 
upon it as an unwanted child, not knowing how it would grow up 
and rather suspicious of its future activities. Big business was 
definitely apprehensive and critical, and probably joined up 
because it felt that it could look after its interests better from inside 
the committee than from outside. 

It was obvious also that any comprehensive planning could 
only take place under a free national government, strong enough 
and popular enough to be in a position to introduce fundamental 
changes in the social and economic structure. Thus the attainment 
of national freedom and the elimination of foreign control became 
an essential pre-requisite for planning. There were many other 
obstacles — our social backwardness, customs, traditional outlook, 
etc. — but they had in any event to be faced. Planning thus was 
not so much for the present, as for an unascertained future, and 
there was an air of unreality about it. Yet it had to be based on 

395" 



the present and we hoped that this future was not a distant one. 
If we could collect the available material, co-ordinate it, and draw 
up blue-prints, we would prepare the ground for the real effective 
future planning, meanwhile indicating to provincial governments 
and states the lines on which they should proceed and develop 
their resources. The attempt to plan and to see the various national 
activities — economic, social, cultural — fitting into each other, 
had also a highly educative value for ourselves and the general 
public. It made the people come out of their narrow grooves of 
thought and action, to think of problems in relation to one another, 
and develop to some extent at least a wider co-operative outlook. 

The original idea behind the Planning Committee had been 
to further industrialization — 'the problems of poverty and un- 
employment, of national defence and of economic regeneration 
in general cannot be solved without industrialization. As a step 
towards such industrialization, a comprehensive scheme of national 
planning should be formulated. This scheme should provide for 
the development of heavy key industries, medium scale industries, 

and cottage industries ' But no planning could possibly ignore 

agriculture, which was the main stay of the people; equally impor- 
tant were the social services. So one thing led to another and it was 
impossible to isolate anything or to progress in one direction without 
corresponding progress in another. The more we thought of this 
planning business, the vaster it grew in its sweep and range till 
it seemed to embrace almost every activity. That did not mean 
we intended regulating and regimenting everything, but we had 
to keep almost everything in view even in deciding about one 
particular sector of the plan. The fascination of this work grew 
upon me and, I think, upon the other members of our committee 
also. But at the same time certain vagueness and indefiniteness 
crept in; instead of concentrating on some major aspects of the 
plan we tended to become diffuse. This also led to delay in the 
work of many of our sub-committees which lacked the sense of 
urgency and ofworking for a definite objective within a stated time. 

Constituted as we were, it was not easy for all of us to agree 
to any basic social policy or principles underlying social organi- 
zation. Any attempt to discuss these principles in the abstract 
was bound to lead to fundamental differences of approach at 
the outset and possibly to a splitting up of the committee. Not 
to have such a guiding policy was a serious drawback, yet there 
was no help for it. We decided to consider the general problem 
of planning as well as each individual problem concretely and 
not in the abstract, and allow principles to develop out of such 
considerations. Broadly speaking, there were two approaches: 
the socialist one aiming at the elimination of the profit motive 
and emphasizing the importance of equitable distribution, and 
the big business one striving to retain free enterprise and the 

396" 



profit motive as far as possible, and laying greater stress on 
production. There was also a difference in outlook between 
those who favoured a rapid growth of heavy industry and others 
who wanted greater attention to be paid to the development of 
village and cottage industries, thus absorbing the vast number 
of the unemployed and partially employed. Ultimately there 
were bound to be differences in the final conclusions. It did 
not very much matter even if there were two or more reports, 
provided that all the available facts were collected and co- 
ordinated, the common ground mapped out, and the divergencies 
indicated. When the time came for giving effect to the Plan, 
the then existing democratic government would have to choose 
what basic policy to adopt. Meanwhile a great deal of essential 
preparation would have been made and the various aspects of 
the problem placed before the public and the various provincial 
and state governments. 

Obviously we could not consider any problem, much less plan, 
without some definite aim and social objective. That aim was 
declared to be to ensure an adequate standard of living for the 
masses, in other words, to get rid of the appalling poverty of the 
people. The irreducible minimum, in terms of money, had been 
estimated by economists at figures varying from Rs. 15 to Rs. 25 
per capita per month. (These are all pre-war figures.) Compared 
to western standards this was very low, and yet it meant an enor- 
mous increase in existing standards in India. An approximate 
estimate of the average annual income per capita was Rjs. 65. This 
included the rich and the poor, the town-dweller, and the villager. 
In view of the great gulf between the rich and the poor and the 
concentration of wealth in the hands of a few, the average income 
of the villager was estimated to be far less, probably about Rs. 30 
per capita per annum. These figures bring home the terrible poverty 
of the people and the destitute condition of the masses. There was 
lack of food, of clothing, of housing and of every other essential 
requirement of human existence. To remove this lack and ensure 
an irreducible minimum standard for everybody the national in- 
come had to be greatly increased, and in addition to this increased 
production there had to be a more equitable distribution of wealth. 
We calculated that a really progressive standard of living would 
necessitate the increase of the national wealth by 500 or 600 per 
cent. That was, however, too big a jump for us, and we aimed at 
a 200 to 300 per cent increase within ten years. 

We fixed a ten-year period for the plan, with control figures 
for different periods and different sectors of economic life. 

Certain objective tests were also suggested: 

(1) The improvement of nutrition — a balanced diet having a 
calorific value of 2,400 to 2,800 units for an adult worker. 

(2) Improvement in clothing from the then consumption of 

397 



about fifteen yards to at least thirty yards per capita per annum. 

(3) Housing standards to reach at least 100 square feet per 
capita. 
Further, certain indices of progress had to be kept in mind: 

(i) Increase in agricultural production, (ii) Increase in indus- 
trial production, (iii) Diminution of unemployment, (iv) Increase 
in per capita income, (v) Liquidation of illiteracy, (vi) Increase in 
public utility services, (vii) Provision of medical aid on the basis 
of one unit for 1,000 population, (viii) Increase in the average 
expectation of life. 

The objective for the country as a whole was the attainment, 
as far as possible, of national self-sufficiency. International trade 
was certainly not excluded, but we were anxious to avoid being 
drawn into the whirlpool of economic imperialism. We neither 
wanted to be victims of an imperialist power nor to develop such 
tendencies ourselves. The first charge on the country's produce 
should be to meet the domestic needs of food, raw materials, and 
manufactured goods. Surplus production would not be dumped 
abroad but used in exchange for such commodities as we might 
require. To base our national economy on export markets might 
lead to conflicts with other nations and to sudden upsets when 
those markets were closed to us. 

So, though we did not start with a well-defined social theory, 
our social objectives were clear enough and afforded a common 
basis for planning. The very essence of this planning was a large 
measure of regulation and co-ordination. Thus, while free enter- 
prise was not ruled out as such, its scope was severely restricted. 
In regard to defence industries it was decided that they must be 
owned and controlled by the state. Regarding other key industries, 
the majority were of opinion that they should be state-owned, 
but a substantial minority of the committee considered that state 
control would be sufficient. Such control, however, of these industries 
had to be rigid. Public utilities, it was also decided, should be 
owned by some organ of the state — either the Central Government, 
provincial government, or a local board. It was suggested that 
something of the nature of the London Transport Board might 
control public utilities. In regard to other important and vital 
industries, no special rule was laid down but it was made clear 
that the very nature of planning required control in some measure, 
which might vary with the industry. 

In regard to the agency in state-owned industries it was sug- 
gested that as a general rule an autonomous public trust would 
be suitable. Such a trust would ensure public ownership and control 
and at the same time avoid the difficulties and inefficiency which 
sometimes creep in under direct democratic control. Co-operative 
ownership and control were also suggested for industries. Any 
planning would involve a close scrutiny of the development of 

398" 



industry in all its branches and a periodical survey of the progress 
made. It would mean also the training of the technical staffs 
necessary for the further expansion of industry, and the state might 
call upon industries to train such staffs. 

The general principles governing land policy were laid down: 
'Agricultural land, mines, quarries, rivers, and forests are forms 
of national wealth, ownership of which must vest absolutely in 
the people of India collectively.' The co-operative principle should 
be applied to the exploitation of land by developing collective and 
co-operative farms. It was not proposed, however, to rule out 
peasant farming in small holdings, to begin with at any rate, but 
no intermediaries of the type of talukdars, zamindars, etc., should 
be recognized after the transition period was over. The rights and 
title possessed by these classes should be progressively bought out. 
Collective farms were to be started immediately by the state on 
culturable waste land. Co-operative farming could be combined 
either with individual or joint ownership. A certain latitude was 
allowed for various types to develop so that, with greater experi- 
ence, particular types might be encouraged more than others. 

We, or some of us at any rate, hoped to evolve a socialized 
system of credit. If banks, insurance, etc., were not to be nation- 
alized they should at least be under the control of the state, thus 
leading to a state regulation of capital and credit. It was also desir- 
able to control the export and import trade. By these various means 
a considerable measure of state control would be established in 
regard to land as well as in industry as a whole, though varying in 
particular instances, and allowing private initiative to continue in 
a restricted sphere. 

Thus, through the consideration of special problems, we gradu- 
ally developed our social objectives and policy. There were gaps 
in them and occasional vagueness and even some contradiction; 
it was far from a perfect scheme in theory. But I was agreeably 
surprised at the large measure of unanimity achieved by us in spite 
of the incongruous elements in our Committee. The big business 
element was the largest single group and its outlook on many 
matters, especially financial and commercial, was definitely 
conservative. Yet the urge for rapid progress, and the conviction 
that only thus could we solve our problems of poverty and unem- 
ployment, were so great that all of us were forced out ofour grooves 
and compelled to think on new lines. We had avoided a theoretical 
approach, and as each practical problem was viewed in its larger 
context, it led us inevitably in a particular direction. To me the 
spirit of co-operation of the members of the Planning Committee 
was peculiarly soothing and gratifying, for I found it a pleasant 
contrast to the squabbles and conflicts of politics. We knew our 
differences and yet we tried and often succeeded, after discussing 
every point of view, in arriving at an integrated conclusion 

399" 



which was accepted by all of us, or most of us. 

Constituted as we were, not only in our Committee but in the 
larger field of India, we could not then plan for socialism as such. 
Yet it became clear to me that our plan, as it developed, was in- 
evitably leading us towards establishing some of the fundamentals 
of the socialist structure. It was limiting the acquisitive factor in 
society, removing many of the barriers to growth, and thus leading 
to a rapidly expanding social structure. It was based on planning 
for the benefit cf the common man, raising his standards greatly, 
giving him opportunities of growth, and releasing an enormous 
amount of latent talent and capacity. And all this was to be attempt- 
ed in the context of democratic freedom and with a large measure 
of co-operation of some at least of the groups who were normally 
opposed to socialistic doctrine. That co-operation seemed to me 
worth while even if it involved toning down or weakening the plan 
in some respects. Probably I was too optimistic. But so long as a 
big step in the right direction was taken, I felt that the very dyna- 
mics involved in the process of change would facilitate further 
adaptation and progress. If conflict was inevitable, it had to be 
faced; but if it could be avoided or minimized that was an obvious 
gain. Especially as in the political sphere there was conflict enough 
for us and, in the future, there might well be unstable conditions. 
A general consent for a plan was thus of great value. It was easy 
enough to draw up blue-prints based on some idealist conception. 
It was much more difficult to get behind them that measure of 
general consent and approval which was essential for the satis- 
factory working of any plan. 

Planning, though inevitably bringing about a great deal of control 
and co-ordination and interfering in some measure with individual 
freedom, would, as a matter of fact, in the context of India to-day, 
lead to a vast increase of freedom. We have very little freedom to 
lose. We have only to gain freedom. If we adhered to the democratic 
state structure and encouraged co-operative enterprises, many 
of the dangers of regimentation and concentration of power might 
be avoided. 

At our first sessions we had framed a formidable questionnaire 
which was issued to various governments and public bodies, 
universities, chambers of commerce, trade unions, research institutes, 
etc. Twenty-nine sub-committees were also appointed to investigate 
and report on specific problems. Eight of these sub-committees 
were for agricultural problems; several were for industry; five for 
commerce and finance; two for transport; two for education; 
two for public welfare; two for demographic relations; and one 
for women's role in planned economy. There were in all about 
350 members of these sub-committees, some of them overlapping. 
Most of them were specialists or experts in their subjects — business- 
men, government, state, and municipal employees, university profes- 

400" 



sors or lecturers, technicians, scientists, trade unionists, and police A 
men. We collected in this way much of the talent available in the 
country. The only persons who were not permitted to co-operate 
with us, even when they were personally desirous of doing so, 
were the officials and employees of the Government of India. To 
have so many persons associated in our work was helpful in many 
ways. We had the advantage of their special knowledge and experi- 
ence, and they were led to think of their special subject in relation 
to the wider problem. It also led to a greater interest in planning 
all over the country. But these numbers were disadvantageous also, 
for there was inevitable delay when busy people spread out all over 
a vast country had to meet repeatedly. 

I was heartened to come into touch with so much ability and 
earnestness in all departments of national activity, and these 
contacts added to my own education greatly. Our method of work 
was to have an interim report from each sub-committee, which 
the planning committee considered, approving of it or partly 
criticizing it, and then sending it back with its remarks to the 
sub-committee. A final report was then submitted out of which 
arose our decisions on that particular subject. An attempt was 
being made continually to co-ordinate the decisions on each sub- 
ject with those arrived at on other subjects. When all the final 
reports had been thus considered and disposed of, the Planning 
Committee was to review the whole problem in its vastness and 
intricacy and evolve its own comprehensive report, to which the 
sub-committees' reports would be added as appendices. As a matter 
of fact that final report was gradually taking shape in the course 
of our consideration of the sub-committees' reports. 

There were irritating delays, chiefly due to some of the sub- 
committees not keeping to the time-table fixed for them, but on the 
whole we made good progress and got through an enormous amount 
of work. Two interesting decisions were made in connection with 
education. We suggested that definite norms of physical fitness 
for boys and girls be laid down for every stage of education. We 
also suggested establishment of a system of compulsory social or 
labour service, so as to make every young man and woman contri- 
bute one year of his or her life, between the ages of eighteen and 
twenty-two, to national utility, including agriculture, industry, 
public utilities, and public works of all kinds. No exemption was 
to be allowed except for physical or mental disability. 

When World War II started in September, 1939, it was sug- 
gested that the National Planning Committee should suspend its 
activities. In November the Congress governments in the provinces 
resigned and this added to our difficulties, for under the absolute 
rule of the Governors in the provinces no interest was taken in our 
work. Business men were busier than ever making money out of 
war requirements and were not so much interested in planning. 

401" 



The situation was changing from day to day. We decided, however, 
to continue and felt that the war made this even more necessary. 
It was bound to result in further industrialization, and the work 
we had already done and were engaged in doing could be of great 
help in this process. We were dealing then with our sub-com- 
mittees' reports on engineering industries, transport, chemical 
industries, and manufacturing industries, all of the highest import- 
ance from the point of view of the war. But the Government was 
not interested in our work and in fact viewed it with great dis- 
favour. During the early months of the war — the so-called 'phoney' 
period — their policy was not to encourage the growth of Indian 
industry. Afterwards, the pressure of events forced them to buy 
many of their requirements in India, but even so they disapproved 
of any heavy industries being started there. Disapproval meant 
virtual prohibition, for no machinery could be imported without 
government sanction. 

The Planning Committee continued its work and had nearly 
finished dealing with its sub-committees' reports. We were to finish 
what little remained of this work and then proceed to the consi- 
deration of our own comprehensive report. I was, however, arrested 
in October, 1940, and sentenced to a long term of imprisonment. 
Several other members of the Planning Committee and its sub- 
committees were also arrested and sentenced. I was anxious that 
the Planning Committee should continue to function and requested 
my colleagues outside to do so. But they were not willing to work in 
the Committee in my absence. I tried to get the Planning Committee's 
papers and reports in prison so that I might study them and prepare 
a draft report. The Government of India intervened and stopped 
this. No such papers were allowed to reach me, nor were inter- 
views on the subject permitted. 

So the National Planning Committee languished, while I spent 
my days injail. All the work we had done which, though incomplete, 
could be used to great advantage for war purposes, remained in 
the pigeon-holes of our office. I was released in December, 1941, 
and was out of prison for some months. But this period was a hectic 
one for me, as it was for others. All manner of new developments 
had taken place, the Pacific war was on, India was threatened 
with invasion, and it was not possible then to pick up the old 
threads and continue the unfinished work of the planning com- 
mittee unless the political situation cleared up. And then I re- 
turned to prison. 

The Congress and Industry: 
Big Industry versus Cottage Industry 

The Congress, under Gandhiji's leadership, had long championed 
the revival of village industries, especially hand-spinning and 

402" 



hand-weaving. At no time, however, had the Congress been opposed 
to the development of big industries, and whenever it had the 
chance, in the legislatures or elsewhere, it had encouraged this 
development. Congress provincial governments were eager to do 
so. In the twenties when the Tata Steel and Iron Works were in 
difficulties, it was largely due to the insistence of the Congress 
party in the Central Legislature that government aid was given to 
help to tide over a critical period. The development of Indian 
shipbuilding and shipping services had long been a sore point of 
conflict between nationalist opinion and government. The Congress, 
as all other sections of Indian opinion, was anxious that every 
assistance should be given to Indian shipping; the government was 
equally anxious to protect the vested interests of powerful British 
shipping companies. Indian shipping was thus prevented from 
growing by official discrimination against it, although it had both 
capital and technical and managerial ability at its disposal. 
This kind of discrimination worked all along the line whenever 
any British industrial, commercial, or financial interests were 
concerned. 

That huge combine, the Imperial Chemical Industries, has 
been repeatedly favoured at the expenses of Indian industry. 
Some years ago it was given a long term lease for the exploita- 
tion of the minerals, etc., of the Punjab. The terms of this agree- 
ment were, so far as I know, not disclosed, presumably because 
it was not considered 'in the public interest' to do so. 

The Congress provincial governments were anxious to develop 
a power alcohol industry. This was desirable from many points 
ofview, but there was an additional reason in the United Provinces 
and Bihar. The large numbers of sugar factories there were produc- 
ing as a by-product a vast quantity of molasses which was being 
treated as waste material. It was proposed to utilise this for the 
production of power alcohol. The process was simple, there was no, 
difficulty, except one — the interests of the Shell and Burma Oil 
combine were affected. The Government of India championed 
these interests and refused to permit the manufacture of power 
alcohol. It was only in the third year of the present war, after 
Burma fell and the supplies of oil and petrol were cut off, that the 
realization came that power alcohol was necessary and must be 
produced in India. The American Grady Committee strongly 
urged this in 1942. 

The Congress has thus always been in favour of the industria- 
lization of India and, at the same time, has emphasized the deve- 
lopment of cottage industries and worked for this. Is there a con- 
flict between these two approaches? Possibly there is a difference 
in emphasis, a realization of certain human and economic factors 
which were overlooked previously in India. Indian industrialists 
and the politicians who supported them thought too much in terms 

403" 



of the nineteenth century development of capitalist industry in 
Europe and ignored many of the evil consequences that were 
obvious in the twentieth century. In India, because normal progress 
had been arrested for 100 years those consequences were likely to 
be more far-reaching. The kind of medium-scale industries that 
were being started in India, under the prevailing economic system, 
resulted not in absorbing labour, but in creating more unemploy- 
ment. While capital accumulated at one end, poverty and un- 
employment increased at the other. Under a different system, 
with a stress on big scale industries absorbing labour, and with 
planned development this might well have been avoided. 

This fact of increasing mass poverty influenced Gandhi power- 
fully. It is true, I think, that there is a fundamental difference 
between his outlook on life generally and what might be called 
the modern outlook. He is not enamoured of ever-increasing 
standards of living and the growth of luxury at the cost of spiritual 
and moral values. He does not favour the soft life; for him the 
straight way is the hard way, and the love of luxury leads to crooked- 
ness and loss of virtue. Above all he is shocked at the vast gulf that 
stretches between the rich and the poor, in their ways of living, 
and their opportunities of growth. For his own personal and psycho- 
logical satisfaction, he crossed that gulf and went over to the side 
of the poor, adopting, with only such improvements as the poor 
themselves could afford, their ways of living, their dress or lack 
of dress. This vast difference between the few rich and the poverty- 
stricken masses seemed to him to be due to two principal causes: 
foreign rule and the exploitation that accompanied it, and the 
capitalist industrial civilization of the west as embodied in the big 
machine. He reacted against both. He looked back with yearning 
to the days of the old autonomous and more-or-less self-contained 
village community where there had been an automatic balance 
between production, distribution, and consumption; where political 
or economic power was spread out and not concentrated as it is 
to-day; where a kind of simple democracy prevailed; where the 
gulf between the rich and the poor was not so marked; where 
the evil of great cities were absent and people lived in contact with 
the life-giving soil and breathed the pure air of the open spaces. 

There was all this basic difference in outlook as to the meaning 
of life itself between him and many others, and this difference 
coloured his language as well as his activities. His language, vivid 
and powerful as it often was, drew its inspiration from the religious 
and moral teachings of the ages, principally of India but also of 
other countries. Moral values must prevail, the ends can never 
justify unworthy means, or else the individual and the race perish. 

And yet he was no dreamer living in some fantasy of his own 
creation, cut off from life and its problems. He came from Gujrat, 
the home of hard-headed businessmen, and he had an unrivalled 

404" 



knowledge of the Indian villages and the conditions of life that 
prevailed there. It was out ofthat personal experience that he evolved 
his programme of the spinning-wheel and village industry. 
If immediate relief was to be given to the vast numbers of the 
unemployed and partially employed, if the rot that was spreading 
throughout India and paralysing the masses was to be stopped, if 
the villagers' standards were to be raised, however, little en 
masse, if they were to be taught self-reliance instead of waiting help- 
lessly like derelicts for relief from others, if all this was to be done 
without much capital, then there seemed no other way. Apart 
from the evils inherent in foreign rule and exploitation, and the 
lack offreedom to initiate and carry through big schemes ofreform, 
the problem of India was one of scarcity of capital and abundance 
of labour — how to utilize that wasted labour, that manpower 
that was producing nothing. Foolish comparisons are made between 
manpower and machine-power; of course a big machine can 
do the work of a thousand or ten thousand persons. But if those 
ten thousand sit idly by or starve, the introduction of the machine 
is not a social gain., except in long perspective which envisages 
a change in social conditions. When the big machine is not there 
at all, then no question of comparison arises; it is a nett gain both 
from the individual and the national point ofview to utilize man- 
power for production. There is no necessary conflict between 
this and the introduction ofmachinery on the largest scale, provid- 
ed that machinery is used primarily for absorbing labour and not 
for creating fresh unemployment. 

Comparisons between India and the small highly industrializ- 
ed countries of the west, or big countries with relatively sparse 
populations, like the U.S.S.R. or the U.S.A., are misleading. In 
western Europe the process of industrialization has proceeded 
for 100 years, and gradually the population has adjusted itself 
to it; the population has grown rapidly, then stabilized itself, and 
is now declining. In the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. there are vast 
tracts with a small, though growing, population. A tractor is an 
absolute necessity there to exploit the land for agriculture. It is 
not so obvious that a tractor is equally necessary in the densely 
populated Gangetic valley, so long as vast numbers depend on 
the land alone for sustenance. Other problems arise, as they have 
arisen even in America. Agriculture has been carried on for 
thousands of years in India and the soil has been exploited to the 
utmost. Would the deep churning up of the soil by tractors lead 
to impoverishment of this soil as well as to soil erosion? When 
railways were built in India and high embankments put up for 
the purpose, no thought was given to the natural drainage of the 
country. The embankments interfered with this drainage system 
and, as a result, we have had repeated and ever-increasing floods 
and soil erosion, and malaria has spread. 

405" 



I am all for tractors and big machinery, and I am convinced 
that the rapid industrialization of India is essential to relieve the 
pressure on land, to combat poverty and raise standards of living, 
for defence and a variety of other purposes. But I am equally 
convinced that the most careful planning and adjustment are 
necessary if we are to reap the full benefit of industrialization 
and avoid many of its dangers. This planning is necessary to-day 
in all countries of arrested growth, like China and India, which 
have strong traditions of their own. 

In China I was greatly attracted to the Industrial Co-opera- 
tives — the Indusco movement — and it seems to me that some 
such movement is peculiarly suited to India. It would fit in with 
the Indian background, give a democratic basis to small industry, 
and develop the co-operative habit. It could be made to com- 
plement big industry. It must be remembered that, however 
rapid might be the development of heavy industry in India, a 
vas field will remain open to small and cottage industries. 
Even in Soviet Russia owner-producer co-operatives have played 
an important part in industrial growth. 

The increasing use of electric power facilitates the growth of 
small industry and makes it economically capable of competing 
with large-scale industry. There is also a growing opinion in 
favour of decentralization, and even Henry Ford had advocated 
it. Scientists are pointing out the psychological and biological 
dangers of loss of contact with the soil which results from life 
in great industrial cities. Some have even said that human survi- 
val necessitates a going back to the soil and the village. Fortun- 
ately, science has made it possible to-day for populations to be 
spread out and remain near the soil and yet enjoy all the ameni- 
ties of modern civilization and culture. 

However that may be, the problem before us in India during 
recent decades has been how, in the existing circumstances and 
restricted as we were by alien rule and its attendant vested inte- 
rests, we could relieve the poverty of the masses and produce a 
spirit of self-reliance among them. There are many arguments 
in favour of developing cottage industries at any time, but situat- 
ed as we were that was certainly the most practical thing we 
could do. The methods adopted may not have been the best or 
the most suitable. The problem was vast, difficult, and intricate, 
and we had frequently to face suppression by government. We 
had to learn gradually by the process of trial and error. I think 
we should have encouraged co-operatives from the beginning, 
and relied more on expert technical and scientific knowledge 
for the improvement of small machines suitable for cottage and 
village use. The co-operation principle is now being introduced 
in these organizations. 

G. D. H. Cole, the economist, has said that 'Gandhi's cam- 

406" 



paign for the development of the home-made cloth industry is 
no mere fad of a romantic eager to revive the past, but a practi- 
cal attempt to relieve the poverty and uplift the standard of the 
village.' It was that undoubtedly, and it was much more. It 
forced India to think of the poor peasant in human terms, to realize 
that behind the glitter of a few cities lay this morass of misery 
and poverty, to grasp the fundamental fact that the true test of 
progress and freedom in India did not lie in the creation of a 
number of millionaires or prosperous lawyers and the like, or 
in the setting up of councils and assemblies, but in the change 
in the status and conditions of life of the peasant. The British had 
created a new caste or class in India, the English-educated class, 
which lived in a world of its own, cut off from the mass of the 
population, and looked always, even when protesting, towards 
its rulers. Gandhi bridged that gap to some extent and forced it 
to turn its head and look towards its own people. 

Gandhiji's attitude to the use of machinery seemed to undergo 
a gradual change. 'What I object to,' he said, 'is the craze for 
machinery, not machinery as such.' 'If we could have electricity 
in every village home, I shall not mind villagers plying their 
implements and tools with electricity.' The big machines seemed 
to him to lead inevitably, at least in the circumstances of to-day, 
to the concentration of power and riches: 'I consider it a sin 
and injustice to use machinery for the purpose of concentration 
of power and riches in the hands of the few. To-day the machine 
is used in this way.' He even came to accept the necessity of many 
kinds of heavy industries and large-scale key industries and public 
utilities, provided they were state-owned and did not interfere 
with some kinds of cottage industries which he considered as 
essential. Referring to his own proposals, he said: 'The whole of 
this programme will be a structure on sand if it is not built on the 
solid foundation of economic equality.' 

Thus even the enthusiastic advocates for cottage and small- 
scale industries recognize that big-scale industry is, to a certain 
extent, necessary and inevitable; only they would like to limit 
it as far as possible. Superficially then the question becomes one 
of emphasis and adjustment of the two forms of production and 
economy. It can hardly be challenged that, in the context of the 
modern world, no country can be politically and economically 
independent, even within the framework of international inter- 
dependence, unless it is highly industrialized and has developed 
its power resources to the utmost. Nor can it achieve or maintain 
high standards of living and liquidate poverty without the aid 
of modern technology in almost every sphere of life. An indus- 
trially backward country will continually upset the world equi- 
librium and encourage the aggressive tendencies of more deve- 
loped countries. Even if it retains its political independence, this 

407" 



will be nominal only, and economic control will tend to pass to 
others. This control will inevitably upset its own small-scale 
economy which it has sought to preserve in pursuit of its own 
view of life. Thus an attempt to build up a country's economy 
largely on the basis of cottage and small-scale industries is doomed 
to failure. It will not solve the basic problems of the country or 
maintain freedom, nor will it fit in with the world framework, 
except as a colonial appendage. 

Is it possible to have two entirely different kinds of economy 
in a country — one based on the big machine and industrializa- 
tion, and the other mainly on cottage industries? This is hardly 
conceivable, for one must overcome the other, and there can be 
little doubt that the big machine will triumph unless it is forcibly 
prevented from doing so. Thus it is not a mere question of adjust- 
ment of the two forms of production and economy. One must be 
dominating and paramount, with the other as complementary 
to it, fitting in where it can. The economy based on the latest 
technical achievements of the day must necessarily be the domi- 
nating one. If technology demands the big machine, as it does to-day 
in a large measure, then the big machine with all its implications 
and consequences must be accepted. Where it is possible, in terms 
of that technology, to decentralize production, this would be 
desirable. But, in any event, the latest technique has to be follow- 
ed, and to adhere to out-worn and out-of-date methods of produc- 
tion, except as a temporary and stop gap measure, is to arrest 
growth and development. 

Any argument as to the relative merits of small-scale and 
large-scale industry seems strangely irrelevant to-day when the 
world, and the dominating facts of the situation that confront 
it, have decided in favour of the latter. Even in India the decision 
has been made by these facts themselves, and no one doubts that 
India will be rapidly industrialized in the near future. She has 
already gone a good way in that direction. The evils of unrestricted 
and unplanned industrialization are well recognized to-day. 
Whether these evils are necessary concomitants of big industry, 
or derived from the social and economic structure behind it, is 
another matter. If the economic structure is primarily responsible 
for them, then surely we should. set about changing that structure, 
instead of blaming the inevitable and desirable development in 
technique. 

The real question is not one of quantitative adjustment and 
balancing of various incongruous elements and methods of pro- 
duction, but a qualitative change-over to something different 
and new, from which various social consequences flow. The 
economic and political aspects of this qualitative change are 
important, but equally important are the social and psycholo- 
gical aspects. In India especially, where we have been wedded 

408" 



far too long to past forms and modes of thought and action, new 
experiences, new processes, leading to new ideas and new hori- 
zons, are necessary. Thus we will change the static character 
of our living and make it dynamic and vital, and our minds will 
become active and adventurous. New situations lead to new 
experiences, as the mind is compelled to deal with them and 
adapt itself to a changing environment. 

It is well recognized now that a child's education should be 
intimately associated with some craft or manual activity. The 
mind is stimulated thereby and there is a co-ordination between 
the activities of the mind and the hands. So also the mind of a 
growing boy or girl is stimulated by the machine. It grows under 
the machine's impact (under proper conditions, of course, and 
not as an exploited and unhappy worker in a factory) and opens 
out new horizons. Simple scientific experiments, peeps into the 
microscope, and an explanation of the ordinary phenomena of 
nature bring excitement in their train, an understanding of some 
of life's processes, and a desire to experiment and find out instead 
of relying on set phrases and old formulae. Self-confidence and 
the co-operative spirit grow, and frustration, arising out of the 
miasma of the past, lessens. A civilization based on ever-changing 
and advancing mechanical techniques leads to this. Such a civi- 
lization is a marked change, a jump almost from the older type, 
and is intimately connected with modern industrialization. 
Inevitably it gives rise to new problems and difficulties, but it also 
shows the way to overcome them. 

I have a partiality for the literary aspects of education and I 
admire the classics, but I am quite sure that some elementary- 
scientific training in physics and chemistry, and especially biology, 
as also in the application of science, is essential for all boys and 
girls. Only thus can they understand and fit into the modern world 
and develop, to some extent at least, the scientific temper. There 
is something very wonderful about the high achievements of 
science and modern technology (which no doubt will be bettered 
in the near future), in the superb ingenuity of scientific instruments, 
in the amazingly delicate and yet powerful machines, in all that 
has flowed from the adventurous inquiries of science and its 
applications, in the glimpses into the fascinating workshop and 
processes of nature, in the fine sweep of science, through its my-, 
riad workers, in the realms of thought and practice, and, above 
all, in the fact that all this has come out of the mind of man. 

Government Checks Industrial Growth 
War Production is Diversion from Normal Production 

Heavy industry was represented in India by the Tata Iron and 
Steel Works at Jamshedpur. There was nothing else of the kind 

409" 



and the other engineering workshops were really j<Jbbing shops. 
Even the development of Tatas had been slow because of Gov- 
ernment policy. During World War I, when there was a shortage 
of locomotives and railway carriages and wagons, Tatas decided 
to make locomotives and, I think, even imported machinery for 
the purpose; but when the war ended, the Government of India 
and the Railway Board (which is a department of the central 
government) decided to continue their patronage of British 
locomotives. There is obviously no private market for locomo- 
tives, as the railways were either controlled by Government or 
owned by British companies, and so Tatas had to give up the 
idea of making locomotives. 

The three fundamental requirements of India, if she is to 
develop industrially and otherwise, are a heavy engineering and 
machine-making industry, scientific research institutes, and elec- 
tric power. These must be the foundations of all planning, and 
the national planning committee laid the greatest emphasis on 
them. We lacked all three, and bottlenecks in industrial expan- 
sion were always occurring. A forward policy could have rapidly 
removed these bottlenecks, but the government's policy was the 
reverse of forward and was obviously one of preventing the 
development of heavy industry in India. Even when World 
War II started, the necessary machinery was not allowed to be 
imported; later shipping difficulties were pleaded. There was 
neither lack of capital nor skilled personnel in India, only machi- 
nery was lacking, and industrialists were clamouring for it. If 
opportunities had been given for the importation of machinery, 
not only would the economic position of India have been infinitely 
better, but the whole aspect of the war in the far eastern theatres 
might have changed. Many of the essential articles which had 
to be brought over, usually by air and at great cost and under 
considerable difficulties, could have been manufactured in India. 
India would have really become an arsenal for China and the east, 
and her industrial progress might have matched that of Canada 
or Australia. But imperative as the needs of the war situation 
were, the future needs of British industry were always kept in view, 
and it was considered undesirable to develop any industries in 
India which might compete with British industries in the post- 
war years. This was no secret policy; public expression was given 
to it in British journals, and there was continuous reference to it 
and protests against it in India. 

Jamshedji Tata, the far-sighted founder of Tata Steel, had 
vision enough to start the Indian Institute of Science in Banga- 
lore. This research institute was one of the very few of its kind 
in India; the others were some government institutions with 
limited objectives. The vast field of scientific and industrial 
research, which has thousands of institutes, academies, and special 

410" 



stations in the U.S.A. and the Soviet Union, was thus almost 
wholly neglected in India, except for the Bangalore institute and 
some work done in the universities. An effort was made, some- 
time after World War II started, to encourage research and, 
though limited in scope, it has produced good results. 

While shipbuilding and locomotive manufacture were dis- 
couraged and prevented, an effort to build up an automobile 
industry was also scotched. Some years before World War II, 
preparations were started for this and everything was worked out 
in co-operation with a famous American firm of automobile 
manufacturers. A number of assembly plants bad already been 
functioning in India. It was now proposed to manufacture all 
the parts in India with Indian capital and management and 
Indian personnel. By arrangement with the American corporation 
their patents could be used and their skilled and technical super- 
vision was available for the initial period. The provincial govern- 
ment of Bombay, which was then functioning under a Congress 
ministry, promised assistance in various ways. The planning 
committee was especially interested in this project. Everything in 
fact had been fixed up and all that remained was to import the 
machinery. The Secretary of State for India however did not 
approve and gave his fiat against the importation of the machinery. 
According to him 'any attempt to set up this industry now would 
divert both labour and machinery which are more urgently needed 
for the war.' This was in the early months of the war, during 
the so-called phoney period. It was pointed out that plenty of 
labour, even skilled labour, was available and in fact was idle. 
War necessity was also a curious argument, for that hecessity itself 
demanded motor transport. But the Secretary of State for India, 
the final authority, sitting in London, was not moved by these 
arguments. It was reported also that a rival and powerful 
automobile corporation in America did not approve of the start- 
ing of an automobile industry in India under someone else's 
auspices. 

Transport became one of the major problems of the war in 
India. There was the lack of motor trucks, of petroleum, of 
locomotives and railway wagons, even of coal. Almost all these 
difficulties would have been much easier of solution if the pre- 
war proposals on behalf of India had not been turned down. 
Locomotives, railway cars, motor trucks, as well as armoured 
vehicles would have been manufactured in India. Power alcohol 
would have helped greatly in easing the strain caused by scarcity 
of petroleum. As for coal there was no scarcity in India; there 
were huge reserves but only very little was produced for use. Coal 
production has actually gone down during the war years in spite 
of increased demand. Conditions in coal mines were so bad and 
wages so low that workeis were not attracted. Ultimately the 

411" 



bar on women working underground was removed as women 
were available at those wages. No attempt was made to overhaul 
the coal industry and improve conditions and wages so as to attract 
workers. Owing to lack of coal, the expansion of industry has 
suffered greatly and even existing factories have had to stop 
working. 

Some hundreds of locomotives and many thousands of rail- 
way cars were shipped from India to the Middle East, thus 
adding to the transport difficulties in India. Even the permanent 
way was uprooted in some places for transfer elsewhere. The 
casual way in which all this was done, without any regard to future 
consequences, was amazing. There was a complete lack of plan- 
ning and foresight, and the partial solution of one problem led 
immediately to more serious problems. 

An attempt was made at the end of 1939 or the beginning of 
1940 to start an aircraft manufacturing industry in India. Again 
everything was fixed up with an American firm and urgent 
cables were sent to the Government of India and army head- 
quarters in India for their consent. There was no response. After 
repeated reminders a reply was forthcoming disapproving of 
the scheme. Why make aeroplanes in India when you could buy 
them in England and America? 

In pre-war days a large number of medicines and drugs and 
vaccines used to come to India from Germany. War stopped this. 
It was immediately suggested that some of the more essential 
vaccines and medicines might be made in India. This could 
easily be done in some of the Government institutes. The Gov- 
ernment of India did not approve and pointed out that every- 
thing that was necessary could now be obtained through Impe- 
rial Chemical Industries. When it was suggested that the same 
thing could be made in India at much less cost, and utilized for 
army as well as general public use without any private interest, 
high authority was indignant at the intrusion of such base consi- 
derations in matters of state policy. 'Government,' it was said, 
'was not a commercial institution!' 

Government was not a commercial institution but it was very 
much interested in commercial institutions, and one of these was 
Imperial Chemicals. This huge combine was given many faci- 
lities. Even without such facilities it had such enormous resources 
that no Indian firm, except to some extent Tatas, could possibly 
compete with it. Apart from these facilities it had powerful sup- 
port both in India and England. A few months after leaving the 
viceroyalty of India, Lord Linlithgow appeared in a new role 
as a director of Imperial Chemicals. This demonstrates the very 
close connection between big business in England and the Govern- 
ment of India, and how this connection must necessarily affect 
policy. Lord Linlithgow may have been a substantial shareholder 

412" 



in Imperial Chemicals even when he was Viceroy of India. In 
any event he has now placed the prestige of his Indian connection 
and his special knowledge derived as Viceroy at the disposal of 
Imperial Chemicals. 

Lord Linlithgow declared as Viceroy in December, 1942: 'We 
have achieved immense things in the field of supply. India has 
made a contribution of outstanding importance and value... 
for the first six months of the war the value of contracts placed 
was approximately 29 crores. For the next months from April 
to October, 1942, it was. 137 crores. Over the whole period to 
the end of October, 1942, it was no less than 428 crores: and these 
figures exclude the value of work done in the ordnance factories 
which is in itself very considerable.'* This is perfectly true and 
India's contribution to the war effort has grown tremendously 
since this was said. One would imagine that this represents a vast 
increase in industrial activity and a much larger index of produc- 
tion. Yet, surprisingly, there has not been much change. The 
index of India's industrial activity in 1938-39 was 111.1 (taking 
1935 as 100). In 1939-40 it was 114.0; in 1940-41 it varied bet- 
ween 112.1 to 127.0; in March, 1942, it was 118.9; it fell in April, 
1942, to 109.2, and then gradually rose to 116.2 in July, 1942. 
These figures are not complete as they do not include munitions 
and some chemical industries. Nevertheless they are important 
and significant. 

The amazing fact emerges that the total industrial activity of 
India in July, 1942, was, apart from munitions, etc., only slightly 
in excess of the pre-war period. There was a brief spurt in Decem- 
ber, 1941, when the index figure went up to 127.0, and then 
declined. And yet the value of Government contracts placed with 
industries was progressively increasing. For the six months Octo- 
ber to March, 1939-40, these contracts amounted to 290 million 
rupees, according to Lord Linlithgow, and for the six months 
April to October, 1942, they were for 1,370 million rupees. 

All these tremendous war orders thus do not represent any 
increase in the total industrial activity, but indicate its large- 
scale diversion from normal production to production for speci- 
alized war purposes. For the moment they supplied war needs 
but at the cost of a terrific lowering of production for civilian 
needs. This inevitably had far-reaching consequences. While 
sterling balances in favour of India grew in London, and money 
accumulated in the hands of a few persons in India, the country 
as a whole was starved of essential needs, vast and ever-increas- 
ing quantities of paper money circulated, and prices went up 
and sometimes reached fantastic figures. Already by the middle 
of 1942 a food crisis was evident; in the autumn of 1943 famine 
killed its millions in Bengal and other parts of India. The burden 

*The figures are in rupees. A crore is ten millions. 

413" 



of the war and of the official policy pursued in its connection fell 
on scores of millions in India who were least capable of shoulder- 
ing it, and crushed out of existence vast numbers of people who 
died by the cruellest of deaths — slow starvation. 

The figures I have given end with 1942; I have no later ones. 
Probably many changes have taken place since then and the 
index of India's industrial activity may be higher now.* But the 
picture they reveal has not changed in any fundamental aspect. 
The same processes are at work, the same crises follow one after 
the other, the same patchwork and temporary remedies are 
applied, the same lack of any planned and comprehensive outlook 
is evident, the same partiality for the present and future of British 
industry prevails — and meanwhile people continue to die from 
lack of food and from epidemics. 

It is true that some of the existing industries, notably the 
textile, the iron and steel, and the jute industries, have prospered 
exceedingly. The number of millionaires among industrial mag- 
nates, war contractors, hoarders, and profiteers, has grown, and 
large sums have accumulated in the hands of small upper strata 
of India's people, in spite of a heavy super tax. But labour 
generally has not profited, and Mr. N. M. Joshi, the labour leader, 
declared in the Central Assembly that labour conditions in India 
had become worse during the war. Land owners and middle 
farmers, especially in the Punjab and Sind, have prospered, but 
the great majority of the agricultural population have been hard 
hit by war conditions and have suffered greatly. Consumers 
generally have been progressively ground down by inflation and 
the rise in prices. 

In the middle of 1942 an American technical mission — the 
Grady Committee — came to India to inspect the existing indus- 
tries and make suggestions for increased production. They were 
naturally concerned with production for war purposes only. Their 
report was never published, possibly because the Government 
of India vetoed publication. A few of their recommendations 
were, however, announced. They suggested the production of power 
alcohol, the expansion of the steel industry, more electric power, 
greater production of aluminium and refined sulphur, and ratio- 
nalization in various industries. They also recommended the 
institution of high-powered control of production, independent 
of established Government agencies, on the American model. 

*It is not so. The Calcutta journal, Capital, of March 9th, 1944, gives the following 
figures for the index of industrial activity in India. 

(1935-36=100): 1938-39: 111.1. 1939-40: 114.0. 1940-41: 117.3. 1941-42: 
122.7. 1942-43: 108.8. 1943-44: 108.0 (approx.). 1944 (January): 111.7. 

These do not include armament production. Thus, after more than four years of war, 
industrial activity as a whole in India was actually somewhat lower than in the pre-war 
period. 

414" 



Evidently the Grady Committee was not filled with admiration 
for the leisurely, casual, and inefficient methods of the Govern- 
ment of India, on which even total war had produced little 
impression, They were struck, however, by the efficiency and 
organization of the Tata Steel Works, a vast organization run 
entirely by Indians. It was further stated in the preliminary report 
of the Grady Committee that 'the mission has been impressed with 
the good quality and excellent potentiality of Indian labour. The 
Indian is skilful with his hands, and given satisfactory working 
conditions and security of employment, is dependable and indus- 
trious.'* 

During the last two or three years the chemical industry has 
grown in India, shipbuilding has made some advance, and an 
infant aircraft industry has been started. All war industries, includ- 
ing jute and textile mills, have made vast profits, in spite of the 
super tax, and a great deal of capital has accumulated. The 
Government of India had put a ban on capital issues for fresh 
industrial undertakings. Recently there has been some relaxation 
in this respect, though nothing definite may be done till after the 
war. Even this little relaxation has led to a burst of energy from 
big business and huge industrial schemes are taking shape. India, 
whose growth has so long been arrested, appears to be on the 
verge of large-scale industrialization. 



*Comrrenting on the shelving of the Grady Committee's Report, Commerce (Bombay, 
November 28th, 1942) wrote: 'The fact remains that powerful interests are operating 
abroad for the purpose of throttling further industrialization of this country, so that in the 
post-war world there would not be any dangerous competition to the west from the east, ' 

415" 



CHAPTER NINE 

THE LAST PHASE (3) 

World War II 

The Congress Develops a Foreign Policy 



THE NATIONAL CONGRESS, LIKE ALL OTHER POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS 

in India, was for long entirely engrossed in internal politics and 
paid little attention to foreign developments. In the nineteen- 
twenties it began to take some interest in foreign affairs. No 
other organization did so except the small groups of socialists and 
communists. Moslem organizations were interested in Palestine 
and occasionally passed resolutions of sympathy for the Moslem 
Arabs there. The intense nationalism of Turkey, Egypt, and Iran 
was watched by them but not without some apprehension, as 
it was secular, and was leading to reforms which were not wholly 
in keeping with their ideas of Islamic traditions. The Congress 
gradually developed a foreign policy which was based on the 
elimination of political and economic imperialism everywhere 
and the co-operation of free nations. This fitted in with the demand 
for Indian independence. As early as 1920 a resolution on foreign 
policy was passed by the Congress, in which our desire to co-operate 
with other nations and especially to develop friendly relations with 
all our neighbouring countries was emphasized. The possibility 
of another large-scale war was later considered, and in 1927, 
twelve years before World War II actually started, the Congress 
first declared its policy in regard to it. 

This was five or six years before Hitler came into power and 
before Japanese aggression in Manchuria had begun. Mussolini 
was consolidating himself in Italy but did not then appear as a 
major threat to world peace. Fascist Italy was on friendly terms 
with England and British statesmen expressed their admiration 
for the Duce. There were a number of petty dictators in Europe, 
also usually on good terms with the British Government. Between 
England and Soviet Russia, however, there was a complete 
breach; there had been the Arcos raid and withdrawal of diplo- 
matic representatives. In the League of Nations and the Inter- 
national Labour Office British and French policy was definitely 
conservative. In the interminable discussions on disarmament, 

416" 



when every other country represented in the League, as well as 
the U.S.A., were in favour ofthe total abolition of aerial bombard- 
ment, Britain made some vital reservations. For many years the 
British Government had used aircraft, for 'police purposes' it was 
called, for bombing towns and villages in Iraq and the North- West 
Frontier of India. This 'right' was insisted upon, thus preventing 
any general agreement on this subject in the League and later 
in the Disarmament Conference. 

Germany — the Weimar republican Germany — had become a 
full member of the League of Nations, and Locarno had been 
hailed as a forerunner of perpetual peace in Europe and a triumph 
of British policy. Another view of all these developments was that 
Soviet Russia was being isolated and a joint front against her was 
being created in Europe. Russia had just celebrated the tenth 
anniversary of her revolution and had developed friendly ties 
with various eastern countries — Turkey, Iran, Afghanistan, and 
Mongolia. 

The Chinese revolution had also advanced with great strides 
and the nationalist armies had taken possession of half of China, 
coming into conflict with foreign, and especially British, interests 
in the port towns and the interior. Subsequently there had been 
internal trouble and a break-up of the Kuomintang into rival 
groups. 

The world situation seemed to be drifting towards a major 
conflict with England and France as heads of a European group 
of nations, and Soviet Russia associated with some eastern nations. 
The United States of America held aloof from both these groups; 
their intense dislike of communism kept them away from Russia, 
and their distrust of British policy and competition with British 
finance and industry, preventing them from associating them- 
selves with the British group. Over and above these considerations 
was the isolationist sentiment of America and the fear of being 
embroiled in European quarrels. 

In this setting Indian opinion inevitably sided with Soviet 
Russia and the eastern nations. This did not mean any wide- 
spread approval of communism, though a growing number were 
attracted to socialist thought. The triumphs of the Chinese 
revolution were hailed with enthusiasm as portents ofthe approach- 
ing freedom of India and ofthe elimination of European aggression 
in Asia. We developed an interest in nationalist movements in 
the Dutch East Indies and Indo-China, as well as the western 
Asiatic countries and Egypt. The conversion of Singapore into 
a great naval base and the development of Trincomalee harbour 
in Ceylon appeared as parts of the general preparations for the 
coming war, in which Britain would try to consolidate and 
strengthen her imperialist position and crush Soviet Russia and 
the rising nationalist movements of the east. 

417" 



It was with this background that the National Congress began 
to develop its foreign policy in 1927. It declared that India could 
be no party to an imperialist war, and in no event should India 
be made to join any war without the consent of her people being 
obtained. In the years that followed, this declaration was frequently 
repeated and widespread propaganda was carried on in accord- 
ance with it. It became one of the foundations of Congress policy 
and, it was generally accepted, of Indian policy. No individual 
or organization in India opposed it. 

Meanwhile changes were taking place in Europe, and Hitler 
and nazism had risen. The Congress immediately reacted against 
these changes and denounced them, for Hitler and his creed 
seemed the very embodiment and intensification of the impe- 
rialism and racialism against which the Congress was struggling. 
Japanese aggression in Manchuria produced even stronger reac- 
tions because of sympathy for China. Abyssinia, Spain, the Sino- 
Japanese war, Czechoslovakia, and Munich, added to this 
strength of feeling and the tension of approaching war. 

But this coming war was likely to be different from the one 
that had been envisaged before Hitler had arisen. Even so, British 
policy had been almost continuously pro-fascist and pro-nazi and 
it was difficult to believe that it would suddenly change overnight 
and champion freedom and democracy. Its dominant imperialist 
outlook and desire to hold on to its empire would continue despite 
other developments; also its basic opposition to Russia and what 
Russia represented. But it became increasingly obvious that in 
spite of every desire to appease Hitler he was becoming a dominat- 
ing power in Europe, entirely upsetting the old balance and menac- 
ing the vital interests of the British Empire. War between Eng- 
land and Germany became probable, and if this broke out what 
then would our policy be? How would we reconcile the two 
dominating trends of our policy: Opposition to British imperialism 
and opposition to fascism and nazism? How would we bring in 
line our nationalism and our internationalism? It was a difficult 
question in the existing circumstances, difficult for us, but offering 
no difficulty if the British Government took a step to demonstrate 
to us that they had given up their imperialist policy in India and 
wanted to rely on popular goodwill. 

In a contest between nationalism and internationalism, 
nationalism was bound to win. That had happened in every 
country and in every crisis; in a country under foreign domina- 
tion, with bitter memories of continuous struggle and suffering, 
that was an inevitable and unavoidable consequence, England 
and France had played false to republican Spain and betrayed 
Czechoslovakia, and thus sacrificed internationalism for what 
they considered, wrongly as events proved, their national inter- 
ests. The United States of America had clung to isolationism, 

4!8 



in spite of their evident sympathy with England, France, and 
China, and their hatred of nazism and Japanese militarism and 
aggression. It was Pearl Harbour that flung them headlong into 
war. Soviet Russia, the very emblem of internationalism, had 
followed a strictly national policy, bringing confusion to many 
of her friends and sympathizers. It was the sudden and un- 
announced attack by the German armies that brought war to 
the U.S.S.R. The Scandinavian countries and Holland and 
Belgium tried to avoid war and entanglement in the vain hope 
of saving themselves, and yet were overwhelmed by it. Turkey 
has sat precariously for five years on the thin edge of a varying 
neutrality, governed solely by national considerations. Egypt, 
still a semi-colonial country in spite of its apparent independ- 
ence, itself one of the major battle areas, occupies a curious and 
anomalous position. For all practical purposes it is a belligerent 
country completely under the control of the armed forces of the 
United Nations, and yet apparently it is not a belligerent. 

There may be justification or excuse for all these policies 
adopted by various governments and countries. A democracy 
cannot easily jump into war without preparing its people and 
gaining their co-operation. Even an authoritarian state has to 
prepare the ground. But whatever the reason or justification may 
be, it is clear that whenever a crisis has occurred, national consi- 
derations, or what were considered to be such, have been para- 
mount and all others, which did not fit in with them, have been 
swept away. It was extraordinary how, during the Munich crises, 
the hundreds of international organizations, anti-fascist leagues, 
etc., in Europe were struck dumb and became powerless and 
ineffective. Individuals and small groups may become inter- 
nationally minded and may even be prepared to sacrifice personal 
and immediate national interests for a larger cause, but not so 
nations. It is only when international interests are believed to be 
in line with national interests that they arouse enthusiasm. 

A few months ago the London Economist, discussing British 
foreign policy, wrote: 'The only foreign policy that has any hope 
of being consistently pursued is one in which national interests 
are fully and obviously safeguarded. No nation puts the interests 
of the international community before its own. It is only if the two 
can be seen to coincide that there is any possibility of effective 
internationalism.' 

Internationalism can indeed only develop in a free country, 
for all the thought and energy of a subject country are directed 
towards the achievement of its own freedom. That subject con- 
dition is like a cancerous growth inside the body, which not 
only prevents any limb from becoming healthy but is a constant 
irritant to the mind and colours all thought and action. Conflict 
is inherent in it and such conflict leads to a concentration of 

419" 



thought on it and prevents a consideration of wider issues. The 
history of a long succession of past conflicts and suffering be- 
comes the inseparable companion of both the individual and the 
national mind. It becomes an obsession, a dominating passion, 
which cannot be exorcised except by removing its root cause. 
And even then, when the sense of subjection has gone, the cure 
is slow, for the injuries of the mind take longer to heal than those 
of the body. 

All this background we have long had in India, and yet Gandhi 
gave a turn to our nationalist movement which lessened the 
feelings of frustration and bitterness. Those feelings continued but 
I do not know of any other nationalist movement which has been 
so free from hatred. Gandhi was an intense nationalist; he was 
also, at the same time, a man who felt he had a message not only 
for India but for the world, and he ardently desired world peace. 
His nationalism, therefore, had a certain world outlook and was 
entirely free from any aggressive intent. Desiring the independence 
of India, he had come to believe that a world federation of interde- 
pendent states was the only right goal, however distant that might 
be. He had said: 'My idea of nationalism is that my country may 
become free, that if need be the whole of the country may die, 
so that the human race may live. There is no room for race hatred 
here. Let that be our nationalism.' And again: 'I do want to 
think in terms of the whole world. My patriotism includes the good 
of mankind in general. Therefore, my service of India includes 

the services of humanity Isolated independence is not the 

goal of the world states. It is voluntary interdependence. The 
better mind of the world desires to-day not absolutely indepen- 
dent states, warring one against another, but a federation of 
friendly, inter-dependent states. The consummation of that event 
may be far off. I want to make no grand claims for our country. 
But I see nothing grand or impossible about our expressing our 
readiness for universal inter-dependence rather than independence. 
I desire the ability to be totally independent without asserting 
the independence.' 

As the nationalist movement grew in strength and self-con- 
fidence, many people began to think in terms of a free India: 
what she would be like, what she would do, and what her rela- 
tions with other countries would be. The very bigness and potential 
strength and resources of the country made them think in big 
terms. India could not be a mere hanger-on of any country or 
group of nations; her freedom and growth would make a vital 
difference to Asia and therefore to the world. That led inevitably 
to the conception of full independence and a severance of the 
bonds that tied her to England and her empire. Dominion status, 
even when that status approached independence, seemed an 
absurd limitation and a hindrance to full growth. The idea behind 

420" 



dominion status, of a mother country closely connected with her 
daughter nations, all of them having a common cultural back- 
ground, seemed totally inapplicable to India. It meant certainly 
a wider sphere of international co-operation, which was desirable, 
but it also meant at the same time lesser co-operation with countries 
outside that empire or commonwealth group. It thus became 
a limiting factor, and our ideas, full of the promise of the future, 
overstepped these boundaries and looked to a wider co-operation. 
In particular, we thought of close relations with our neighbour 
countries in the east and west, with China, Afghanistan, Iran, 
and the Soviet Union. Even with distant America we wanted 
closer relations, for we could learn much from the United States 
as also from the Soviet Union. There was a feeling that we had 
exhausted our capacity for learning anything more from England, 
and in any event we could only profit by contact with each other 
after breaking the unhealthy bond that tied us and by meeting 
on equal terms. 

The racial discrimination and treatment of Indians in some 
of the British dominions and colonies were powerful factors in 
our determination to break from that group. In particular, South 
Africa was a constant irritant, and East Africa and Kenya, directly 
under the British colonial policy. Curiously enough we got on 
well, as individuals, with Canadians, Australians, and New 
Zealanders, for they represent a new tradition and were free 
from many of the prejudices and the social conservatism of the 
British. 

When we talked of the independence of India it was not in 
terms of isolation. We realized, perhaps more than many other 
countries, that the old type of complete national independence 
was doomed, and there must be a new era of world co-operation. 
We made it repeatedly clear, therefore, that we were perfectly 
agreeable to limit that independence, in common with other 
nations, within some international framework. That framework 
should preferably cover the world or as large a part of it as 
possible, or be regional. The British Commonwealth did not fit 
in with either of these conceptions, though it could be a part of 
the larger framework 

It is surprising how internationally minded we grew in spite 
of our intense nationalism. No other nationalist movement of a 
subject country came anywhere near this, and the general ten- 
dency in such other countries was to keep clear of international 
commitments. In India also there were those who objected to 
our lining up with republican Spain and China, Abyssinia and 
Czechoslovakia. Why antagonize powerful nations like Italy, 
Germany, and Japan, they said; every enemy of Britain should 
be treated as a friend; idealism has no place in politics, which 
concerns itself with power and the opportune use of it. But 

421" 



these objectors were overwhelmed by the mass sentiment the 
Congress had created and hardly ever gave public expression to 
their views. The Moslem League remained throughout discreetly 
silent and never committed itself on any such international issue. 

In 1938 the Congress sent a medical unit consisting of a number 
of doctors and necessary equipment and material to China. For 
several years this unit did good work there. When this was orga- 
nized, Subhas Bose was president of the Congress. He did not 
approve of any step being taken by the Congress which was 
anti- Japanese or anti-German or anti-Italian. And yet such was 
the feeling in the Congress and the country that he did not 
oppose this or many other manifestations of Congress sympathy 
with China and the victims of fascist and nazi aggression. We 
passed many resolutions and organized many demonstrations of 
which he did not approve during the period of his presidentship, 
but he submitted to them without protest because he realized 
the strength of feeling behind them. There was a big difference 
in outlook between him and others in the Congress Executive, 
both in regard to foreign and internal matters, and this led to 
a break early in 1939. He then attacked Congress policy publicly 
and, early in August, 1939. the Congress Executive took the very 
unusual step of taking disciplinary action against him, one of its 
ex-presidents. 

The Congress Approach to War 

Thus the Congress laid down and frequently repeated a dual 
policy in regard to war. There was, on the one hand, opposition 
to fascism, nazism, and Japanese militarism, both because of 
their internal policies and their aggression against other coun- 
tries; there was intense sympathy with the victims of that aggres- 
sion; and there was a willingness to join up in any war or other 
attempt to stop this aggression. On the other hand, there was an 
emphasis on the freedom of India, not only because that was our 
fundamental objective for which we had continuously laboured, 
but also especially in relation to a possible war. For we reiterated 
that only a free India could take proper part in such a war; only 
through freedom could we overcome the bitter heritage of our 
past relations with Britain and arouse enthusiasm and mobilize 
our great resources. Without that freedom the war would be 
like any old war, a contest between rival imperialism, and an 
attempt to defend and perpetuate the British Empire as such. 
It seemed absurd and impossible for us to line up in defence of that 
very imperialism against which we had been struggling for so 
long. And even if a few of us, in view of larger considerations, 
considered that a lesser evil, it was utterly beyond our capacity 
to carry our people. Only freedom could release mass energy and 

422" 



convert bitterness into enthusiasm for a cause. There was no 
other way. 

The Congress specially demanded that India should not be 
committed to any war without the consent of her people or their 
representatives, and that no Indian troops be sent for service 
abroad without such consent. The Central Legislative Assembly, 
consisting of various groups and parties, had also put forward 
this latter claim. It had long been a grievance of the Indian 
people that our armed forces were sent abroad for imperialist 
purposes and often to conquer or suppress other peoples with 
whom we had no quarrel whatever, and with whose efforts to 
regain their freedom we sympthized. Indian troops had been 
used as mercenaries for this purpose in Burma, China, Iran, 
and the Middle East, and parts of Africa. They have become 
symbols of British imperialism in all these countries and anta- 
gonized their peoples against India. I remember the bitter re- 
mark of an Egyptian: 'You have not only lost your own freedom 
but you help the British to enslave others.' 

The two parts of this dual policy did not automatically fit into 
each other; there was an element of mutual contradiction in 
them. But that contradiction was not of our creation; it was in- 
herent in the circumstances and was inevitably mirrored in any 
policy that arose from those circumstances. Repeatedly we pointed 
out the inconsistency of condemning fascism and nazism and 
maintaining imperialist domination. It was true that the former 
were indulging in horrid crimes whilst imperialism in India and 
elsewhere had stabilized itself. The difference was one of degree 
and of time, not of kind. The formet also were far away, some 
thing which we read about; the latter was always at our doorstep, 
surrounding all of us and pervading the entire atmosphere. We 
emphasized the absurdity of holding aloft the banner of demo- 
cracy elsewhere and denying it to us in India. 

Whatever inconsistency there might have been in our dual 
policy, no question of the doctrine of non-violence coming in the 
way of armed conflict for defence or against aggression arose. 

I was in England and on the continent of Europe in the sum- 
mer of 1938 and in speech, writing, and private conversation 
I explained this policy of ours, and pointed out the dangers of 
allowing matters to drift or to remain as they were. At the height 
of the Sudetenland crisis, anxious Czechs asked me what India 
was likely to do in case of war. Danger was too near and terrible 
for them to consider fine points and old grievances, nevertheless 
they appreciated what I said and agreed with the logic of it. 

About the middle of 1939 it became known that Indian troops 
had been despatched overseas, probably to Singapore and the 
Middle East. Immediately there was an outcry at this having 
been done without any reference to the representatives of the 

423" 



people. It was recognized that troop movements during a period 
of crisis have often to be secret. Still there were many ways of 
taking representative leaders into confidence. There were the 
party leaders in the Central Assembly, and in every province 
there were popularly elected governments. In the normal course 
the Central Government had to consult and share confidence in 
many matters with these provincial ministers. But not even 
formal or nominal respect was shown to the people's representa- 
tives and the declared wishes of the nation. Steps were also being 
taken, through the British Parliament, to amend the Govern- 
ment of India Act of 1935 under which the provincial govern- 
ments were functioning, with a view to concentrating all power, 
in the event of a war emergency, in the Central Government. 
Normally, in a democratic country, this might have been a 
natural and reasonable step, if taken with the consent of the parties 
concerned. It is well known that federating states, provinces, or 
autonomous units in a federation are very jealous of their rights 
and do not easily agree to give them up to a central administration 
even in a period of crisis and emergency. This tug-of-war is 
continuous in the U.S.A. and, as I write this, a referendum in 
Australia has rejected the proposal to add to the powers of the 
Commonwealth Government at the expense of the states even 
for the purposes and duration of the war. And yet both in the 
U.S.A. and Australia the Central Government and legislature 
are popularly elected and consist of representatives of those very 
states. In India the Central Government was, and is, wholly 
irresponsible and authoritarian, not elected and not in any way 
responsible to the people generally or to the provinces. It func- 
tioned completely as an agent of the British Government. To 
add to its power at the expense of the provincial governments and 
legislatures meant weakening still further these popular provincial 
governments and striking at the very basis of provincial autonomy. 
This was deeply resented. It was felt that this was contrary to the 
assurances under which Congress governments had been formed, 
and indicated that, as previously, war would be imposed upon 
India without any reference to her chosen representatives. 

The Congress Executive expressed its strong dissent with this 
policy which it considered a deliberate flouting of the declara- 
tions both of the Congress and the Central Legislature. It declared 
that it must resist any imposition of this kind and could not agree 
to India being committed to far-reaching policies without the 
consent of her people. Again it stated (early in August 1939) 
that 'In this world crisis the sympathies of the Working Committee 
are entirely with the people who stand for democracy and free- 
dom and the Congress has repeatedly condemned fascist aggres- 
sion in Europe, Africa, and the far east of Asia, as well as the 
betrayal of democracy by British imperialism in Czechoslovakia 

424" 



and Spain.' But, it was added, 'The past policy of the British Govern- 
ment as well as recent developments, demonstrated abundantly 
that this government does not stand for freedom and democracy 
and may at any time betray these ideals. India cannot associate 
herself with such a government or be asked to give her resources 
for democratic freedom which is denied to her and which is likely 
to be betrayed.' As a first step in protest against this policy, the 
Congress members of the Central Legislative Assembly were 
asked to refrain from attending the next session of the Assembly. 
This last resolution was passed three weeks before war actually 
broke out in Europe. It seemed that the Government of India, 
and the British Government behind it, were bent on ignoring 
completely Indian opinion, not only in regard to the major issues 
raised by the war crisis, but also on many minor matters. This 
policy was reflected in the attitudes of the Governors in the pro- 
vinces and the civil service administration which became more 
non-co-operative with the Congress governments. The position of 
these Congress provincial governments was becoming increasingly 
difficult, and strong sections of public opinion were excited and 
apprehensive. They feared that the British Government would 
act as it had done a quarter of a century earlier in 1914, impose 
the war on India, ignoring the provincial governments and public 
opinion and everything that had happened during this period, and 
make the war a cloak for suppressing such limited freedom as India 
had obtained and exploiting her resources without check. 

But much had happened during this quarter of a century 
and the mood of the people was very different. The idea of a great 
country like India being treated as a chattel and her people 
utterly and contemptuously ignored was bitterly resented. 
Was all the struggle and suffering of the past twenty years to 
count for nothing? Were the Indian people to shame the land 
from which they sprang by quietly submitting to this disgrace and 
humiliation? Many of them had learnt to resist what they consi- 
dered evil, and not to submit when such submission was considered 
shameful. They had willingly accepted the consequences of such 
non-submission. 

Then there were others, a younger generation, which had 
little personal experience of the nationalist struggle and what 
it had involved, and for whom even the civil disobedience move- 
ments of the twenties and early thirties were past history and 
nothing more. They had not been tested in the fire of experience 
and suffering and took many things for granted. They were critical 
of the older generation, considering it weak and compromising, 
and imagined that strong language was good substitute for action. 
They quarrelled amonsgst themselves over questions of personal 
leadership or fine points of political or economic doctrine. They 
discussed world affairs without knowing much about them; they 

425" 



were immature and lacked ballast. There was good material in 
them, much enthusiasm for good causes, but somehow the 
general effect produced by them was disappointing and discourag- 
ing. Perhaps it was a temporary phase, which they would outgrow, 
which they may have outgrown already after the bitter experiences 
which they have since had. 

Whatever the other differences, all these groups within the 
nationalist ranks reacted in similar fashion to British policy 
towards India during the crisis. They were angered by it and 
called upon Congress to resist it. A proud and sensitive nation- 
alism did not want to submit to this humiliation. All other consi- 
derations became secondary. 

War was declared in Europe and immediately the Viceroy of 
India announced that India was also at war. One man, and he a 
foreigner and a representative of a hated system, could plunge 
four hundred millions of human beings into war without the 
slightest reference to them. There was something fundamentally 
wrong and rotten in a system under which the fate of these 
millions could be decided in this way. In the dominions the 
decision was taken by popular representatives after full debate 
and consideration of various points of view. Not so in India, 
and it hurt. 

Reaction to War 

I was in Chungking when the war began in Europe. The Cong- 
ress President cabled me to return immediately, and I hurried 
back. A meeting of the Congress Executive was being held when 
I arrived, and to this meeting Mr. M. A. Jinnah was also invited, 
but he expressed his inability to come. The Viceroy had not only 
committed India formally to the war but had issued a number 
of ordinances; the British Parliament had also passed the Govern- 
ment of India Amending Act. All these enactments circumscribed 
and limited the powers and activities of the provincial govern- 
ments and were resented, especially as no effort had been made to 
consult the people's representatives. Indeed, their oft-repeated 
wishes and declarations had been completely ignored. 

On September 14th, 1939, after long deliberation, the Cong- 
ress Working Committee issued a lengthy statement on the war 
crisis. The steps the Victory had taken and the new enactments 
and decrees were referred to and it was stated that 'the Working 
Committee must take the gravest view of these developments.' 
Fascism and nazism were condemned, and particularly 'the latest 
aggression of the nazi government in Germany against Poland,' 
and sympathy was expressed for those who resisted it. 

While co-operation was offered it was added that 'any imposed 
decision., .will necessarily have to be opposed by them. If co- 

426" 



operation is desired in a worthy cause, this cannot be obtained 
by compulsion and imposition, and the Committee cannot agree 
to the carrying out by the Indian people of orders issued by 
external authority. Co-operation must be between equals by 
mutual consent for a cause which both consider to be worthy. 
The people of India have, in the recent past, faced grave risks 
and willingly made great sacrifices to secure their own freedom 
and establish a free democratic state in India, and their sym- 
pathy is entirely on the side of democracy and freedom. But 
India cannot associate herself in a war said to be for democratic 
freedom when that very freedom is denied to her, and such limited 
freedom as she possesses taken away from her. 

'The Committee are aware that the Governments of Great 
Britain and France have declared that they are fighting for 
democracy and freedom and to put an end to aggression. But 
the history of the recent past is full of examples showing the 
constant divergence between the spoken word, the ideals pro- 
claimed, and the real motives and objectives.' Certain past 
events, during and after World War I, were referred to and then: 
'Subsequent history has demonstrated afresh how even a seemingly 
fervent declaration of faith may be followed by an ignoble deser- 
tion. . . .Again it is asserted that democracy is in danger and must 
be defended, and with this statement the Committee are in entire 
agreement. The Committee believe that the peoples of the west 
are moved by this ideal and objective, and for these they are 
prepared to make sacrifices; but again and again the ideals and 
sentiments of the people and of those who have sacrificed them- 
selves in the struggle have been ignored and faith has not been 
kept with them. 

'If the war is to defend the status quo, imperialist possessions, 
colonies, vested interests, and privilege, then India can have 
nothing to do with it. If, however, the issue is democracy and a 
world order based on democracy, then India is intensely interest- 
ed in it. The Committee are convinced that the interests of Indian 
democracy do not conflict with the interests of British democracy 
or of world democracy; but there is an inherent and ineradicable 
conflict between democracy for India and elsewhere and imperia- 
lism and fascism. If Great Britain fights for the maintenance and 
extension of democracy, tnen she must necessarily end imperia- 
lism in her own possessions... .A free democratic India will 
gladly associate herself with other free nations for mutual defence 
against aggression and for economic co-operation. She will work 
for the establishment of a real world order based on freedom 
and democracy, utilising the world's kowledge and resources for 
the progress and advancement of humanity.' 

The Congress Executive, nationalist as it was, took an inter- 
national view and considered the war as something much more 

427" 



than a conflict of armed forces. 'The crisis that has overtaken 
Europe is not of Europe only but of humanity, and will not pass 
like other crises or wars, leaving the essential strucure of the 
present-day world intact. It is likely to re-fashion the world for 
good or ill, politically, socially, and economically. This crisis is 
the inevitable consequence of the social and political conflicts 
and contradictions which have grown alarmingly since the last 
Great War, and it will not be finally resolved till these conflicts 
and contradictions are removed and a new equilibrium estab- 
lished. That equilibrium can only be based on the ending of 
the domination and exploitation of one country by another, and 
on a reorganization of economic relations on a more just basis 
for the common good of all. India is the crux of the problem, for 
India has been the outstanding example of modern imperialism, 
and no re-fashioning of the world can succeed which ignores this 
vital problem. With her vast resources she must play an important 
part in any scheme of world reorganization; but she can only do 
so as a free nation whose energies have been released to work for 
this great end. Freedom to-day is indivisible, and every attempt 
to retain imperialist domination in any part of the world will 
lead inevitably to fresh disaster.' 

The Committee proceeded to refer to the offers of Rulers of 
Indian states to support the cause of democracy in Europe, and 
suggested that it would be fitting if they introduced democracy 
within their own states, where undiluted autocracy prevailed. 

The Committee again stated their eagerness to help in every 
way but expressed their apprehension at the trend of British 
policy both in the past and present in which they failed 'to find 
any attempt to advance the cause of democracy or self-deter- 
mination or any evidence that the present war declarations of 
the British Government are being, or are going to be, acted 
upon.' They added, however, that in view 'of the gravity of the 
occasion and the fact that the pace of events during the last few 
days has often been swifter than the working of men's minds, 
the Committee desire to take no final decision at this stage, so 
as to allow for full elucidation of the issues at stake, the real 
objectives aimed at, and the position of India in the present and 
in the future.' They invited therefore 'the British Government 
to declare in unequivocal terms what their war aims are in regard 
to democracy and imperialism and the new order that is envisaged, 
in particular, how these aims are going to apply to India and to 
be given effect to in the present. Do they include elimination of 
imperialism and the treatment of India as a free nation whose 
policy will be guided in accordance with the wishes of her peo- 
ple?. . . .The real test of any declaration is its application in the 
present, for it is the present that will govern action to-day and 
give shape to the future It will be infinite tragedy if even this 

428" 



terrible war is carried on in the spirit of imperialism and for the 
purpose of retaining this structure which is itself the cause of war 
and human degradation.' 

This statement, issued after anxious deliberation, was an 
attempt to overcome the barriers that had arisen between India 
and England and poisoned their relations for a century and a 
half, to find some way to reconcile our eagerness to join in this 
world struggle with popular enthusiasm behind us, and our 
passionate desire for freedom. The assertion of India's right to 
freedom was no new thing; it was not the result of the war or 
the international crisis. It had long been the very basis for all 
our thoughts and activities, round which we had revolved for 
many generations. There was no difficulty whatever in making a 
clear declaration of India's freedom and then adapting this to 
existing circumstances, keeping the needs of the war in view. 
Indeed the very necessities of the war demanded it. If England 
had the desire and the will to acknowledge India's freedom, 
every major difficulty vanished and what remained was capable 
of adjustment with the consent of the parties concerned. In 
every province provincial governments were functioning. It was 
easy to evolve a popular central apparatus of government for 
the war period, which would organize the war effort on an 
efficient and popular basis, co-operate fully with the armed 
forces, and be a link between the people and the provincial 
governments on the one hand, and the British Government on 
the other. Other constitutional problems could be postponed 
till after the war, though of course it was desirable to attempt 
to solve them even earlier. After the war the elected representa- 
tives of the people would draw up the permanent constitution 
and enter into a treaty with England in regard to our mutual 
interests. 

It was no easy matter for the Congress Executive to make this 
offer to England when most of our people had little apprecia- 
tion of the international issues involved and were expressing 
their resentment at recent British policy. We knew that long- 
standing distrust and suspicion on both sides could not vanish 
away by some magic word. Yet we hoped that the very stress of 
events would induce England's leaders to come out of their 
imperialist grooves, take a long view and accept our offer, thus 
ending the long feud between England and India, and releasing 
India's enthusiasm and resources for the war. 

But that was not to be, and their answer was a refusal of all 
we had asked for. It became clear to us that they did not want 
us as friends and colleagues but as a slave people to do their 
bidding. We used the same word 'co-operation,' but a different 
meaning was attached to it by either party. For us co-operation 
was to be between comrades and equals; for them it meant their 

429" 



commanding and our obeying without demur. It was impossible 
for us to accept this position without abandoning and betraying 
everything we had stood for and that had given some meaning 
to our lives. And even if some of us had been willing to do so 
we could not have carried our people with us; we would have 
been stranded, isolated, and cut off' from the living currents of 
nationalism, as well as from the internationalism that we envisaged. 

The position of our provincial governments became difficult 
and the choice for them was submission to continuous inter- 
ference by the Governor and the Viceroy or conflict with them. 
The superior services were wholly on the Governor's side and 
looked upon the ministers and the legislature, even more than 
before, as intruders. Again there was the old constitutional con- 
flict between an autocratic king or his representatives and a 
parliament, with this addition, that the former were foreigners 
basing their rule on armed force. It was decided that the Con- 
gress governments in the eight provinces out of eleven (all except 
Bengal, Punjab, and Sind) should resign in protest. Some were 
of opinion that instead of resigning they should carry on and thus 
invite dismissal by the Governor. It was clear that in view of the 
inherent conflict, which was daily becoming more obvious, clashes 
between them and the governors were inevitable and if they did 
not resign, they would be dismissed from office. They took the 
strictly constitutional course of resigning and thus inviting a 
dissolution of the legislature and fresh elections. As big majorities 
were behind them in the Igislatures no other ministries could be 
formed. The governors, however, were anxious to avoid new 
elections as they knew well enough that these would result in the 
overwhelming triumph of the Congress. They did not dissolve 
the legislatures but merely suspended them, and assumed all the 
powers of the provincial governments and legislatures. They 
became completely autocratic heads of provinces, making laws, 
issuing decrees, and doing everything else they wanted to without 
the slightest reference to any elected body or to public opinion. 

British spokesmen have often asserted that the Congress Exe- 
cutive acted in an authoritarian manner in calling upon the 
provincial governments to resign. This is an odd charge, coming 
from those who have been functioning in a more autocractic and 
authoritarian manner than anyone outside the fascist and nazi 
countries. As a matter of fact the very foundation of Congress 
policy, on which members of the legislatures had been elected 
and provincial governments had been formed after assurances 
from the Viceroy, was freedom of action in the provincial sphere 
and no interference by Governor or Viceroy. This interference 
was now a frequent occurrence and even the statutory powers 
of the provincial governments, given under the Government of 
India Act of 1935, had been further limited. These statutory 

430" 



powers of the provinces were now overridden for war purposes 

by an amendment of the Act by the British Parliament. The 
discretion when and where to interfere in the provinces was left 
entirely to the Government of India, which meant the Viceroy, 
and no statutory safeguards were left to protect the powers of 
the provincial governments, which could carry on only on 
sufferance. The Viceroy and Governor-General, with the assured 
co-operation of his nominated executive council, could override, 
under cloak of war necessity, every decision of the provincial 
governments and legislatures. No responsible ministry could 
function in these circumstances; it would either come into con- 
flict with the Governor and the services or with the legislature 
and its constituents. Each legislature, where there was a Congress 
majority, formally adopted the demand of the Congress after 
the war began, and the rejection of this demand by the Viceroy, 
inevitably meant conflict or resignation. The general feeling 
among the rank and file was for launching a struggle with the 
British power. The Congress Executive was, however, anxious 
to avoid this as far as possible and took the milder course. It 
was easy for the British Government to test the feeling of the 
people generally or of the voters by having general elections. 
They avoided this because they had no doubt that elections 
would result in overwhelming Congress victories. 

In the major provinces of Bengal and the Punjab and in the 
small province of Sind, there were no resignations. In both 
Bengal and Punjab the Governors and the superior services had 
all along played a dominant role and hence no conflict could 
arise. Even so, in Bengal on a later occasion the Governor did 
not like the Prime Minister and forced him and his ministry 
to resign. In Sind also, at a later stage, the Prime Minister 
addressed a letter to the Viceroy criticising the British Gov- 
ernment's policy and, as a protest, gave up an honour conferred 
on him by that Government. He did not resign. The Viceroy, 
however, made the Governor dismiss him from the premiership 
because of this letter, which was not considered in keeping with 
the viceregal dignity. 

It is nearly five years since the Congress provincial govern- 
ments resigned. During this entire period there has been one- 
man rule, the Governor's in each of the provinces and we have 
gone back, under the pretext and in the fog of war, to the full- 
blooded autocracy of the middle-nineteenth century. The civil 
service and the police are supreme and if any of their number, 
English or Indian, shows the slightest disinclination to carry 
out the ruthless policy of the British Government, the gravest 
displeasure is visited on him. Much of the work done by the 
Congress governments has been undone and their schemes have 
been liquidated. Fortunately, some of the tenancy legislation 

431" 



has remained, but even this is often interpreted against the in- 
terests of the tenants. 

During the last two years, in the three minor provinces of 
Assam, Orissa, and the North-West Frontier, provincial govern- 
ments have been reconstituted by the very simple device of 
imprisoning a number of members of the legislatures, and thus 
converting a minority into a majority. In Bengal the existing 
ministry depends entirely on the support of the large European 
bloc. The Orissa ministry did not survive for long and that pro- 
vince reverted to the Governor's one-man rule. In the Fron- 
tier Province a ministry continued to function, though it had no 
majority to back it, and hence a meeting of the Legislature was 
avoided. In the Punjab and Sind special executive orders were 
passed on Congress members of the legislatures (those out of 
prison) preventing them from attending the sessions of the legisla- 
tive assemblies or participating in any public activities.* 

Another Congress Offer and its Rejection 
by the British Government. Mr. Winston Churchill 

The change-over to autocratic and one-man rule in eight of the 
provinces was not a mere substitution of the people at the top, 
such as a change in ministries might indicate. It was a radical 
and organic change affecting the whole spirit, policy, and methods 
of the entire state organization. The legislatures and the various 
popular checks on the executive and the permanent services vanished, 
and the approach of the civil service, from the Governor downwards, 
and of the police service, towards the public became different. 
It was not merely a reversion and setback to the days before the 
Congress governments had come into power. It was much worse. 
In so-called law it was a going back to the unchecked autocracy 
of the nineteenth century. In practice it was harsher, as the old 
confidence and paternalism were absent, and all the fear and passion 
of a long-established vested interest which was breaking up, per- 
vaded the British element in the administration. The two and a 
quarter years of Congress governments had been hard to bear, 
the carrying out of the policy and orders of those who could always 
be sent to prison if they gave trouble had not been pleasant. Now 
there was a desire not only to resume the old thread but also to 
put these trouble-makers in their proper places. Everyone, the 
peasant in the field, the worker in the factory, the artisans, and 
the shopkeepers, the industrialists, the professional classes, the 
young men and women in colleges, the subordinate services, and 
even those Indians in the higher ranks of the services who had 

* Early in 1945 the Frontier Legislative Assembly had at last to meet for the budget 
session. The Ministry was defeated on a vote of confidence and resigned. A Congress 
Ministry, with Dr. Khan Sahib as Premier, then took office. 

432" 



shown any enthusiasm for the popular governments, must be 
made to realize that British Raj still functioned and had to be 
reckoned with. It was that Raj that would determine their in- 
dividual future and their chances of preferment, and not some 
temporary intruders from outside. Those who had functioned 
as the secretaries of the ministers were now the bosses, acting 
under the Governor, and spoke again in their old superior way; 
the district magistrates resumed their old functions of gauleiters 
for their respective areas; the police felt freer to revert to old 
habits, knowing well that they would be supported and pro- 
tected from above even when they misbehaved. The fog of war 
could be made to cover everything. 

Many even of the critics of Congress governments viewed this 
prospect with dismay. They remembered now many of the virtues 
of those governments and expressed their strong displeasure at 
their resignation. According to them, they should have held on 
whatever the consequences. Curiously enough even members of 
the Moslem League were apprehensive. 

If this was the reaction of non-Congressmen and critics of the 
Congress governments, the reaction of the members and sympa- 
thisers of the Congress, and the members of the legislatures can 
well be imagined. The ministers had resigned from their offices 
but not from membership of the legislature, nor had the speakers 
and the members of these legislatures resigned. Nevertheless they 
were pushed aside and ignored, and no fresh elections were held. 
Even from a purely constitutional point of view this was not easy 
to tolerate and would have produced a crisis in any country. A 
powerful, semi-revolutionary organization like the Congress, 
representing the nationalist sentiment of the country, and with 
a long record of struggle for freedom behind it, could not passively 
accept this autocratic one-man rule It could not just be a specta- 
tor of what was happening, more especially as this was directed 
against it. There were strong and repeated demands for positive 
action to counter this suppression of the legislatures and of public 
activity generally and the whole policy of the Br itish Government 
in regard to India. 

After the refusal of the British Government to state their war 
aims or to make any advance in India, the Congress Working 
-Committee had declared: 'The answer to this demand (of the 
Congress) has been entirely unsatisfactory and an attempt has 
been made on behalf of the British Government to create mis- 
understanding and to befog the main and moral issue The 

Committee can only interpret this attempt to avoid a statement 
of war aims and Indian freedom, by taking shelter under irre- 
levant issues, as a desire to maintain imperialist domination of 
India in alliance with the reactionary elements in the country. 
The Congress has looked upon the war crisis and the problems 

•433 



it raises as essentially a moral issue, and has not sought to profit 
by it in any spirit of bargaining. The moral and dominant issue 
of war aims and India's freedom has to be settled satisfactorily 
before any other subsidiary question can be considered. In no 
event can the Congress accept the responsibility of government, 
even in the transitional period, without real power being given 
to popular representatives.' 

The Committee went on to say that because of the declara- 
tions made on behalf of the British Government, the Congress 
had been compelled to dissociate itself from British policy and, 
as a first step in non-co-operation, the Congress Governments 
in the provinces had resigned. The general policy of non-co- 
operation continued, and would have to continue unless the 
British Government revised its policy. 'The Working Committee 
would, however, remind Congressmen that it is inherent in every 
form of Satyagraha that no effort is spared to achieve an honour- 
able settlement with the opponent The Working Committee 

will, therefore, continue to explore the means of arriving at an 
honourable settlement, even though the British Government 
has banged the door in the face of the Congress.' 

In view of the excitement prevailing in the country and the 
possibility of young men taking to violent courses, the Com- 
mittee reminded the country of the basic policy of non-violence 
and warned it against any breach of it. Even if there was to be 
any civil resistance it must be wholly peaceful. Further that 
'Satyagraha means goodwill towards all, especially towards 
opponents.' This reference to non-violence had no connection 
with the war or with the defence of the country against aggres- 
sion; it was meant to apply to any action that might be taken 
in the cause of Indian freedom against British rule. 

Those were the months when the war in Europe was in a 
quiescent state after the crushing of Poland. It was the so-called 
'phoney' period, and in India especially war seemed very far off 
to the average person, and probably even more so to the British 
authorities in India, except in so far as material had to be 
supplied. The Communist Party in India then, and right upto 
the day when Germany attacked Russia in June, 1941, was wholly 
against any co-operation with the British war effort. Their 
organization had been banned. Their influence was inconsiderable, 
except among some groups of young men. But because they gave 
aggressive expression to a prevailing sentiment, they became a 
kind of ginger group. 

It would have been easy during this period to have general 
elections both in the provinces and for the Central Assembly. 
The war certainly did not come in the way. Such elections 
would have cleared the atmosphere and brought the real situa- 
tion in the country to the surface. But it was that reality itself 

•434 



which was feared by the British authorities, for it would have 
put an end to the many unreal arguments that they were con- 
tinually advancing about the influence of various groups. But 
all elections were avoided. The provinces continued under one- 
man rule, and the Central Assembly, elected under a very res- 
tricted franchise for a three-year period, has now been in exis- 
tence for ten years. Even when the war started in 1939 it was 
ancient and had exceeded its allotted span by two years. Year 
after year its life is extended, its members grow older and more 
venerable, and sometimes die, and even the memory of elections 
fades away. Elections are not liked by the British Government. 
They spoil the routine of life and blur the picture of an India 
of warring creeds and parties. Without elections it is much easier 
to give importance to any individual or group that is deserving 
of favour. 

The situation in the country as a whole, and especially in the 
many provinces where one-man rule now flourished, became pro- 
gressively more tense. Individual Congressmen were sent to 
prison for their normal activities; the peasantry cried loudly for 
relief from the renewed oppression of petty officials and police, 
who sought favour from their superiors by making all manner 
of exactions in the name of the war. The demand for some action 
to meet this situation became imperative, and the Congress, at 
its annual session held at Ramgarh, in Bihar, in March, 1940, 
under the presidentship of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, decided 
that civil disobedience was the only course left. Even so it avoid- 
ed taking any positive step then and asked people to prepare 
for it. 

There was a sense of deepening internal crisis and it seemed 
that a conflict was inevitable. The Defence of India Act, passed 
as a war measure, was being used extensively to suppress normal 
activities and arrest and imprison people, many without trial. 

The sudden change in the war situation, resulting in the inva- 
sion of Denmark and Norway, and a little later in the astonish- 
ing collapse of France, produced a profound impression. People's 
reactions naturally varied, but there was a powerful current of 
sympathy for France and for England immediately after Dunkirk 
and during the air blitz over England. Congress, which had been 
on the verge of civil disobedience, could not think in terms of 
any such movement while the very existence of free England 
hung in the balance. There were some people, of course, who 
thought that England's difficulty and peril were India's oppor- 
tunity, but the leaders of the Congress were definitely opposed 
to any such advantage being taken of a situation full of disas- 
trous foreboding for England, and declared so publicly. All talk 
of civil disobedience was given up for the time being. 

Another attempt was made on behalf of the Congress to arrive 

•435 



at a settlement with the British Government. If the previous 
attempt had been far-reaching and asked for a declaration of 
war-aims in addition to changes in India, the present one was 
brief and concise and referred to India only. It asked for a re- 
cognition of Indian freedom and the establishment of a national 
government at the centre, which meant the co-operation ofvarious 
parties. No fresh legislation by the British Parliament was envisaged 
at that stage. Within the legal framework then existing, Congress 
proposed that a national government be formed by the Viceroy. 
The changes proposed, important as they were, could be brought 
about by agreement and convention. Statutory and constitutional 
changes would of course have to follow, but they could await 
further discussion and a more favourable opportunity, provided 
that India's claim to complete freedom was recognized. Under 
these conditions, full co-operation in the war effort was offered. 

These proposals, intiated by C. Rajagopalachari, toned down 
the oft-repeated Congress demand; they were much less than 
what we had long been claiming. They could be put into effect 
immediately without legal difficulty. They tried to meet the 
claims of other important groups and parties, for the national 
government would inevitably be a composite government. They 
even took into consideration the peculiar position of the British 
Government in India. The Viceroy was to continue, though it 
was presumed that he would not veto the decisions of the na- 
tional government. But his presence as the head of the adminis- 
tration necessarily meant intimate contacts with that government. 
The war apparatus remained under the commander-in-chief; the 
whole complicated structure ,/ civil administration built up by 
the British remained. Indeed the principal effect of the change 
would be to introduce a new spirit in the administration, a new 
outlook, a vigour, and increasing popular co-operation in the 
war effort as well as in tackling the serious problems that were 
facing the country. These changes, together with the definite 
assurance of India's independence after the war, would produce 
a new psychological background in India, leading to th?* fullest 
co-operation in the war. 

It was no easy matter for the Congress to put forward this 
proposal after all its past declarations arul experiences. It was 
felt that a national government built up and circumscribed in 
this way would be ineffective and rather helpless. There was 
considerable opposition in Congress circles, and it was only after 
much difficult and anxious thinking that I brought myself round 
to agree to it. I agreed chiefly because of larger international 
considerations and my desire that, if it was at all honourably 
possible, we should identify ourselves completely with the struggle 
against fascism and nazism. 

But there was a much greater difficulty before us and that was 

•436 



Gandhiji's opposition. This opposition was almost entirely due 
to his pacifism. He had not opposed our previous offers to help 
in the war effort, though no doubt he must have felt uncomfort- 
able about them. Right at the beginning of the war he had told 
the Viceroy that Congress could give full moral help only, but 
that had not been the Congress position as subsequently and 
repeatedly defined. Now he expressed himself definitely against 
Congress agreeing to undertake responsibility for a violent war 
effort. He felt so strongly that he broke on this issue from his 
colleagues as well as the Congress organization. This was a pain- 
ful wrench to all those associated with him, for the Congress of 
to-day was his creation. Nevertheless the Congress organization 
could not accept his application of the principle of non-violence 
to the war situation, and in its eagerness to bring about a settle- 
ment with the British Government, it went to the extreme length 
of breaking with its cherished and well-loved leader. 

The situation in the country was deteriorating in many ways. 
Politically this was obvious. Even economically, while some 
among the peasantry and the workers were somewhat better 
off owing to war conditions, large numbers had been hit hard. 
The persons who were really prospering were the war profiteers, 
contractors, and a horde of officials, chiefly British, employed 
at fancy salaries for war work. The Government's idea appa- 
rently was that the war effort would be best promoted by en- 
couraging the motive for excessive profit. Corruption and nepo- 
tism were rampant and there were no popular checks on them. 
Public criticism was considered a discouragement of war effort 
and hence to be put down by the all-embracing provisions of 
the Defence of India Act. It was a discouraging spectacle. 

All these factors induced us to try our utmost once again to 
arrive at a settlement with the British Government. What were 
the chances? Not very promising. The whole Organization of 
the permanent services was enjoying a freedom from control and 
criticism such as they had not had for more than two genera- 
tions. They could clap in prison any person they disapproved 
of, with or without trial. The Governors enjoyed unrestrained 
power and authority over vast provinces. Why should they con- 
sent to a change unless they were forced to do so by circum- 
stances ? Over the top of the imperial structure sat the Viceroy, 
Lord Linlithgow, surrounded by all the pomp and ceremony 
befitting his high position. Heavy of body and slow of mind, 
solid as a rock and with almost a rock's lack of awareness, possessing 
the qualities and failings of an old-fashioned British aristocrat, he 
sought with integrity and honesty of purpose to find a way out 
ofthe tangle. But his limitations were too many; his mind worked 
in the old groove and shrank back from any innovations; his vision 
was limited by the traditions of the ruling class out of which he 

•437 



came; he saw and heard through the eyes and ears of the civil service 
and others who surrounded him; he distrusted people who talked 
of fundamental political and social changes; he disliked those who 
did not show a becoming appreciation of the high mission of the 
British Empire and its chief representative in India. 

In England there had been a change during the dark days of 
the German blitzkreig over western Europe. Mr. Neville Cham- 
berlain had gone and that was a relief from many points of view. 
The Marquess of Zetland, that ornament of his noble order, had 
also departed from the India Office without any tears being shed. 
In his place had come Mr. Amery, about whom little was known, 
but this little was significant. He had vigorously defended in the 
House of Commons Japanese aggression over China, giving as an 
argument that if they condemned what Japan had done in China, 
they would have to condemn equally what Britain had done in 
India and Egypt. A sound argument used perversely for a wrong 
purpose. 

But the person who really counted was Mr. Winston Churchill, 
the new Prime Minister. Mr. Churchill's views on Indian free- 
dom were clear and definite and had been frequently repeated. 
He stood out as an uncompromising opponent of that freedom. 
In January, 1930, he had said: 'Sooner or later you will have 
to crush Gandhi and the Indian Congress and all they stand 
for.' In December of that year he said: 'The British nation has 
no intention whatever of relinquishing control of Indian life 

and progress We have no intention of casting away that most 

truly bright and precious jewel in the crown of the King, which, 
more than all our dominions and dependencies, constitutes the 
glory and strength of the British empire.' 

Later he explained what those magic words 'Dominion status,' 
so frequently thrown at us, really meant in relation to India. 
In January, 1931, he said: 'We have always contemplated it 
(dominion status) as the ultimate goal, but no one has sup- 
posed, except in a purely ceremonious sense in the way in which 
representatives of India attend conferences during the war, that 
the principle and policy for India would be carried into effect 
in any time which it is reasonable or useful for us to foresee.' 
And, again, in December, 1931: 'Most of the leading public 
men — of whom I was one in those days — made speeches — I 
certainly did — about dominion status, but I did not contemplate 
India having the same constitutional rights and system as Canada 
in any period which we can foresee. .. .England, apart from her 
empire in India, ceases for ever to exist as a great power.' 

That was the crux of the question. India was the empire; 
it was her possession and exploitation that gave glory and strength 
to England and made her a great power. Mr. Churchill could 
not conceive of England except as the head and possessor of a vast 

•438 



empire, and so he could not conceive of India being free. And 
dominion status, which had so long been held out to us as some- 
thing within our grasp, was explained to be a mere matter of words 
and ceremony, very far removed from freedom and power. 
Dominion status, even in its fullest sense, had been rejected by us 
and we claimed independence. The gulf between Mr. Churchill 
and us was vast indeed. 

We remembered his words and knew him to be a stout and 
uncompromising person. We could hope for little from England 
under his leadership. For all his courage and great qualities of 
leadership, he represented the nineteenth century, conservative, 
imperialist England, and seemed to be incapable of understand- 
ing the new world with its complex problems and forces, and 
much less the future which was taking shape. And yet he was 
a big man who could take a big step. His offer of a union with 
France, though made at a time of dire peril, showed vision and 
adaptation to circumstances and had impressed India greatly. 
Perhaps the new position he occupied, with its vast responsibi- 
lities, had enlarged his vision and made him outgrow his earlier 
prejudices and conceptions. Perhaps the very needs of the war 
situation, which were paramount for him, would compel him 
to realize that India's freedom was not only inevitable but desirable 
from the point of view of the war. I remembered that when I was 
going to China in August, 1939, he had sent me, through a mutual 
friend, his good wishes for my visit to that war-racked country. 

So we made that offer not without hope, though not hoping 
too much. The response of the British Government came soon 
after. It was a total rejection, and, what was more, it was couched 
in terms which convinced us that the British had no intention 
whatever of parting with power in India; they were bent on 
encouraging division and strengthening every mediaeval and 
reactionary element. They seemed to prefer civil war and the 
ruin of India to a relaxation of their imperialist control. 

Used though we were to this kind of treatment, it came as a 
shock and a feeling of depression grew. I remember writing an 
article just then to which I gave the title: 'The Parting of the 
Ways.' I had long stood for the independence of India, con- 
vinced that in no other way could we progress and develop as 
a people, or have normal friendly and co-operative relations 
with England. Yet I had looked forward to those friendly rela- 
tions. Now suddenly I felt that unless England changed com- 
pletely there was no common path for us. We must follow diffe- 
rent ways. 

Individual Civil Disobedience 

So instead of the intoxication of the thought of freedom which 

•439 



would unleash our energies and throw us with a nation's enthu- 
siasm into the world struggle, we experienced the aching frustration 
of its denial. And this denial was accompanied by an arrogance 
of language, a self-glorification of British rule and policy, and an 
enumeration of conditions which were said to be necessary before 
India could claim freedom, conditions some of which seemed 
impossible of realization. It became obvious that all this talk 
and ritual of parliamentary debate in England, of rounded phrases 
and pompous utterance, was just political trickery, barely veiling 
the fixed intention to hold on to India as an imperial domain and 
possession for as long as this was possible. The claws ofimperialism 
would continue deep in the living body of India. And that was 
the measure of that international order of freedom and democracy 
for which Britain claimed to be fighting. 

There was yet another significant indication: Burma had put 
forward a modest claim that an assurance of dominion status after 
the war be given her. This was long before the Pacific War started, 
and in any event it did not interfere with the war in any way, for 
it was only intended to take effect after the conclusion of hostilities. 
She asked for dominion status only, not independence. As in the 
case of India, she had been told repeatedly that dominion status 
was the goal of British policy. Unlike India, she was a much more 
homogeneous country and all the objections, real or fancied, which 
were advanced by the British in the case of India, did not apply 
to her. Yet that unanimous demand was refused and no assurance 
was given. Dominion status was for some distant hereafter; it was 
a vague and shadowy metaphysical conception which applied to 
some other world, some different age from ours. It was, as Mr. 
Winston Churchill had indicated, empty verbiage and ceremony 
with no relation to the present or to the immediate future. So also 
the objections that were raised against India's independence, the 
absurd conditions that were laid down, were empty verbiage 
which everyone knew had no reality or substance. The only 
realities were Britain's determination to hold on to India at all 
costs and India's determination to break this hold. All else was 
quibbling, lawyer's talk, or diplomatic prevarication. Only the 
future could show the result of this conflict between incom- 
patibles. 

The future showed us soon enough the results of British policy 
in Burma. In India also that future slowly unrolled itself, bring- 
ing struggle and bitterness and suffering in its train. 

To remain passive spectators of what was happening in India 
after the last insolent repulse from the British Government became 
impossible. Ifthis was the attitude of that Government in the middle 
ofa perilous war, when millions ofpeople all over the world believed 
and faced enormous sacrifices in the cause of freedom, what would 
it be when the crisis was over and that popular pressure had sub- 

•440 



sided? Meanwhile, our people were being picked off all over India 
and sent to prison; our normal activities were interfered with and 
restricted. For it must be remembered that the British Government 
in India is always carrying on a war against the nationalist and 
labour movements; it does not wait for civil disobedience to take 
action. That war flares up occasionally and becomes an attack 
on all fronts, or it tones down a little, but always it has continued.* 
During the brief period of Congress governments in the provinces, 
it was in a quiescent stage, but soon after their resignation it started 
afresh, and the permanent services took peculiar pleasure in 
issuing orders to and imprisoning prominent Congressmen and 
members of the legislatures. 

Positive action became inevitable, for sometimes the only failure 
is in failing to act. That action could only be, in accordance with 
our established policy, in the nature of civil disobedience. Yet 
care was taken not to have any popular upheavals, and civil dis- 
obedience was limited to chosen individuals. It was what is called 
individual civil disobedience as contrasted with the mass variety 
of it. It was really in the nature of a great moral protest. From a 
politician's point of view it seems odd that we should deliberately 
avoid any attempt to upset the administration and make it easy 
for it to put the trouble-makers in prison. That has not been the 
way of aggressive political action or revolution anywhere else. 
Yet that was Gandhi's way of combining morality with revolutionary 
politics, and he was always the inevitable leader when any such 
movement took place. It was his way of showing that while we 
refused to submit to British policy and showed our resentment and 
determination by voluntarily inviting suffering for ourselves, 
yet our object was not to create trouble. 

This individual civil disobedience movement started in a very 
small way, each person having to pass some kind of a test and get 
permission before he or she could take part in it. Those who were 
chosen broke some formal order, were arrested, and sentenced to 
imprisonment. As is usual with us, men at the top were chosen 
first — members of the Congress Executive, ex-ministers of provincial 
governments, members of the legislatures, members of the All- 
India and Provincial Congress committees. Gradually the circle 
grew till between twenty-five to thirty thousand men and women 
were in prison. These included the speakers and a large number 
of members of our provincial legislative assemblies, which had been 

*Many people have beenin prison continuously from the pre-war period. Some youngcomrades 
of mine have now spent fifteen years in prison and are still there. They were boys when they 
were sentenced, barely out of their teens; now they are grey-haired and middle-aged. I have 
come across them during my repeated visits to the United Provinces prisons. I have come, 
stayed for a while, and then gone out; they have remained. Although they are United Provinces 
men and have been kept for some years in United Provinces prisons, they were sentenced in the 
Punjab and arctherefore underthe orders of the Punjab government. The Congress government 
in the Unitid Provinces recommended their release but the Punjab government did not agree. 

•441 



suspended by the Government. Thus we demonstrated that if our 
elected assemblies were not allowed to function their members 
would not submit to autocratic rule and preferred prison to it. 

Apart from those who offered formal civil disobedience, many 
thousands were arrested and sentenced for making speeches or for 
some other activity, or detained without trial. I was arrested at an 
early stage and sentenced to four years' imprisonment for a speech. 

From October, 1940, for over a year, all these persons remained 
in prison. We tried to follow, with such material as we could obtain, 
the course of the war and of events in India and the world. We 
read of the Four Freedoms of President Roosevelt, we heard of 
the Atlantic Charter, and, soon after, of Mr. Churchill's quali- 
fication that this Charter A had no application to India. 

In June, 1941, we were stirred by Hitler's sudden attack on Soviet 
Russia, and followed with anxious interest the dramatic changes 
in the war situation. 

On December 4th, 1941, many of us were discharged. Three 
days later came Pearl Harbour and the Pacific War. 

After Pearl Harbour. Gandhi and Non-Violence 

When we came out of prison the nationalist position, the question 
of India versus England, had in no way changed. Prison affects 
people in various ways; some break down or weaken, others grow 
harder and more confirmed in their convictions, and it is usually 
the latter whose influence is felt more by the mass of the people. 
But though nationally we remained where we were, Pearl Harbour 
and what followed it suddenly created a new tension and gave a 
new perspective. The Congress Working Committee met imme- 
diately after in this new atmosphere of tension. The Japanese had 
made no great advance till then, but major and stunning disasters 
had already taken place. The war ceased to be a distant spectacle 
and began to approach India and affect her intimately. Among 
Congressmen the desire to play an effective part in these perilous 
developments became strong, and the jail-going business seemed 
pointless in this new situation; but what could we do unless some 
door was open for honourable co-operation, and the people could 
be made to feel some positive inspiration for action ? A negative 
fear of threatening danger was not enough. 

In spite of past history and all that had happened, we were 
eager to offer our co-operation in the war and especially for the 
defence of India, subject necessarily to a national government 
which would enable us to function in co-operation with other 
elements in the country, and to make the people feel that it was 
really a national effort and not one imposed by outsiders who had 
enslaved us. There was no difference of opinion on this general 
approach among Congressmen and most others, but a vital dif- 

•442 



ference of principle arose rather unexpectedly. Gandhiji found 
himself unable to give up his fundamental principle of non- 
violence even in regard to external war. The very nearness of that 
war became a challenge to him and a test of faith. If he failed at 
this critical moment, either non-violence was not the all-embracing 
and basic principle and course of action he had believed it to be, 
or else he was wrong in discarding it or compromising with it. 
He could not give up the faith of a lifetime on which he had based 
all his activities, and he felt that he must accept the necessary 
consequences and implications of that non-violence. 

A similar difficulty and conflict had arisen for the first time 
about the time of the Munich crisis in 1938, when war seemed to 
be impending. I was in Europe then and was not present at the 
discussions that took place. But the difficulty passed with the passing 
of the crisis and the postponement of war. When war actually 
started in September, 1939, no such question arose or was discussed 
by us. It was only in A he late summer of 1940 that Gandhiji again 
made it clear co us that he could not make himself a party to 
violent warfare and he would like the Congress to adopt the same 
attitude in regard to it. He was agreeable to giving moral and every 
other kind of help, short of actual assistance in armed and violent 
warfare. He wanted Congress to declare its adherence to the princi- 
ple of non-violence even for a free India. He knew, of course, 
that there were many elements in the country, and even within the 
Congress, which did not have that faith in non-violence; he 
realized that a government of free India was likely to discard non- 
violence when questions of defence were concerned and to build 
up military, naval, and air power. But he wanted, if possible, for 
Congress at least to hold the banner of non-violence aloft and thus 
to train the minds of the people and make them think increasingly 
in terms of peaceful action. He had a horror of seeing India mili- 
tarized. He dreamt of India becoming a symbol and example of 
non-violence, and by her example weaning the rest of the world 
from war and the ways of violence. Even if India as a whole had 
not accepted this idea, Congress should not discard it when the 
time for trial came. 

The Congress had long ago accepted the principle and practice 
of non-violence in its application to our struggle for freedom and 
in building up unity in the nation. At no time had it gone beyond 
that position or applied the principle to defence from external 
aggression or internal disorder. Indeed it had taken an eager interest 
in the development of the Indian army and frequently demanded 
the indianization of its officer personnel. The Congress party in 
the Central Legislature ha,d often moved or participated in resolu- 
tions on this subject. As the leader of that party in the 'twenties, 
my father had accepted membership of the Skeen Committee which 
had been formed for the indianization and reorganization of the 

•443 



Indian army. He resigned subsequently from it, but that was for 
political reasons and had nothing to do with non-violence. In 
1937-38 the Congress party had put forward in the Central Assembly, 
after consulting all the provincial governments, proposals for the 
expansion of the Indian army, its mechanization, the development 
of the absurdly small and almost non-existent naval and air arms, 
and the progressive replacement of the British army in India by 
the Indian army. As the cost of British troops in India was about 
four times that of the Indian troops, the latter could be mechanized 
and expanded without much additional cost, if they took ihe place 
of British troops. Again during the Munich period the importance 
of developing the air arm was emphasized, but Government said 
that expert opinion was not agreed about this. In 1940 the Cong- 
ress Party especially attended the Central Assembly and repeated 
all this and pointed out how incompetent the Government and its 
military department were in making arrangements for India's 
defence. 

At no time, so far as I am aware, was the question of non- 
violence considered in relation to the army, navy, or air forces, 
or the police. It was taken for granted that its application was 
confined to our struggle for freedom. It is true that it had a power- 
ful effect on our thinking in many ways, and it made the Congress 
strongly favour world disarmament and a peaceful solution of 
all international, as well as national, disputes. 

When the Congress governments were functioning in the pro- 
vinces, many of them were eager to encourage some form ofmilitary 
training in the universities and colleges. It was the Government 
of India that disapproved of this and came in the way. 

Gandhiji, no doubt, disapproved of these tendencies, but he 
did not interfere. He did not even like the use of the police as an 
armed force for the suppression of riots, and he expressed his distress 
at it. But he put up with it as a lesser evil, and hoped that his teach- 
ing would gradually sink into the mind of India. It was his dis- 
approval of such tendencies within the Congress that led him to 
sever his formal membership connection with the Congress in the 
early 'thirties, though even so he continued as the undoubted 
leader and adviser of the Congress. It was an anomalous and un- 
satisfactory position for all of us, but perhaps it made him feel that 
thus he was not personally responsible for all the varied decisions 
which Congress took from time to time, which did not wholly 
conform to his principles and convictions. Always there has been 
that inner conflict within him and in our national politics, between 
Gandhi as a national leader and Gandhi as a man with a prophetic 
message, which was not confined to India but was for humanity 
and the world. It is never easy to reconcile a strict adherence to 
truth as one sees it, with the exigencies and expediencies of life, 
and especially of political life. Normally people do not even worry 

•444 



themselves over this problem. They keep truth apart in some corner 
oftheir minds, if they keep it at all anywhere, and accept expediency 
as the measure of action. In politics that has been the universal 
rule, not only because, unfortunately, politicians are a peculiar 
species of opportunists, but because they cannot act purely on the 
personal plane. They have to make others act, and so they have to 
consider the limitations of others and their understanding of, and 
receptivity to, truth. And because of this they have to make com- 
promises with that truth and adapt it to the prevailing circums- 
tances. That adaptation becomes inevitable, and yet there are 
always risks attending it; the tendency to ignore and abandon truth 
grows, and expediency becomes the sole criterion of action. 

Gandhi, for all his rock-like adherence to certain principles, has 
shown a great capacity to adapt himself to others and to changing 
circumstances, to take into consideration the strength and weakness 
of those others, especially of the mass of the people, and how far 
they were capable of acting up to the truth as he saw it. But from 
time to time he pulls himself up, as if he were afraid that he had 
gone too far in his compromising, and returns to his moorings. 
In the midst of action, he seems to be in tune with the mass mind, 
responsive to its capacity and therefore adapting himself to it to 
some extent; at other times he becomes more theoretical and 
apparently less adaptable. There is also the same difference observ- 
able in his action and his writings. This is confusing to his own 
people, and more so to others who are ignorant of the background 
in India. 

How far a single individual can influence a people's thought and 
ideology, it is difficult to say. Some people in history have exerted 
a powerful influence, and yet, it may be that they have emphasized 
and brought out something that already existed in the mind of 
the people, or have given clear and pointed expression to the 
vaguely felt ideas of the age. Gandhi's influence on India's mind 
has been profound in the present age; how long and in what form 
it will endure only the future can show. His influence is not 
limited to those who agree with him or accept him as a national 
leader; it extends to those also who disagree with him and criticize 
him. Very few persons in India accept in its entirety his doctrine 
of non-violence or his economic theories, yet very many have been 
influenced by them in some way or other. Usually speaking in terms 
of religion, he has emphasized the moral approach to political 
problems as well as those of everyday life. The religious background 
has affected those chiefly who were inclined that way, but the 
moral approach has influenced others also. Many have been appre- 
ciably raised to higher levels of moral and ethical action, many 
more have been forced to think at least in those terms, and that 
thought itself has some effect on action and behaviour. Politics 
cease to be just expediency and opportunism, as they usually have 

•445 



been everywhere, and there is a continuous moral tussle preceding 
thought and action. Expediency, or what appears to be immedi- 
ately possible and desirable, can never be ignored, but it is toned 
down by other considerations and a longer view of more distant 
consequences. 

Gandhi's influence in these various directions has pervaded 
India and left its mark. But it is not because of his non-violence 
or economic theories that he has become the foremost and most 
outstanding of India's leaders. To the vast majority of India's 
people he is the symbol of India determined to be free, of militant 
nationalism, of a refusal to submit to arrogant might, 
ofnever agreeing to anything involving national dishonour. Though 
many people in India may disagree with him on a hundred 
matters, though they may criticize him or even part company from 
him on some particular issue, at a time of action and struggle when 
India's freedom is at stake they flock to him again and look up to 
him as their inevitable leader. 

When Gandhiji raised in 1940 the question of non-violence in 
relation to the war and the future of free India, the Congress Work- 
ing Committee had to face the issue squarely. They made it clear 
to him that they were unable to go as far as he wanted them to go 
and could not possibly commit India or the Congress to future 
applications of this principle in the external domain. This led to 
a definite and public break with him on this issue. Two months 
later further discussions led to an agreed formula which was later 
adopted as part of a resolution by the All-India Congress Com- 
mittee. That formula did not wholly represent Gandhiji's attitude; 
it represented what he agreed, perhaps unwillingly, that Congress 
should say on this subject. At that time the British Government 
had already rejected the latest offer made by the Congress for co- 
operation in the war on the basis of a national government. Some 
kind of conflict was approaching and, as was inevitable, both 
Gandhiji and Congress looked towards each other and were impelled 
by a desire to find a way out of the deadlock between them. The 
formula did not refer to the war, as just previously our offer of 
co-operation had been unceremoniously and utterly rejected. 
It dealt theoretically with the Congress policy in regard to non- 
violence, and for the first time stated how, in the opinion of the 
Congress, the free India of the future should apply it in its external 
relations. That part of the resolution ran thus: 

The All-India Congress Committee 'firmly believes in the policy 
and practice of non-violence, not only in the struggle for Swaraj, 
but also, in so far as this may be possible of application, in free 
India. The Committee is convinced, and recent world events have 
demonstrated, that complete world disarmament is necessary an ' 
the establishment of a new andjuster political and economic order, 
if the world is not to destroy itself and revert to barbarism. A free 

•446 



India will, therefore, throw all her weight in favour of world dis- 
armament and should herself be prepared to give a lead in this to 
the world. Such lead will inevitably depend on external factors 
and internal conditions, but the state would do its utmost to give 
effect to this policy of disarmament. Effective disarmament and 
the establishment of world peace by the ending of national wars 
depend ultimately on the removal of the causes of wars and national 
conflicts. These causes must be rooted out by the ending of the 
domination of one country over another and the exploitation of 
one people or group by another. To that end India will peacefully 
labour and it is with this objective in view that the people of India 
desire to attain the status of a free and independent nation. Such 
freedom will be the prelude to the close association with other 
countries within a comity of free nations for the peace and progress 
of the world.' This declaration, it will be noticed, while strongly 
affirming the Congress wish for peaceful action and disarmament, 
also emphasized a number of qualifications and limitations. 

The internal crisis within the Congress was resolved in 1940 
and then came a year of prison for large numbers of us. In Decem- 
ber, 1941, however, the same crisis took shape again when Gandhiji 
insisted on complete non-violence. Again there was a split and 
public disagreement, and the president of the Congress, Maulana 
Abul Kalam Azad, and others were unable to accept Gandhiji's 
viewpoint. It became clear that the Congress as a whole, including 
some of the faithful followers of Gandhiji, disagreed with him in 
this matter. The force of circumstances and the rapid succession 
of dramatic events influenced all of us, including Gandhiji, and he 
refrained from pressing his viewpoint on the Congress, though he 
did not identify himself with the Congress view. 

At no other time was this issue raised by Gandhiji in the Congress. 
When later Sir Stafford Cripps came with his proposals, there was 
no question of non-violence. His proposals were considered purely 
from the political point of view. In late months, leading up to 
August, 1942, Gandhiji's nationalism and intense desire for free- 
dom made him even agree to Congress participation in the war if 
India could function as a free country. For him this was a remark- 
able and astonishing change, .involving suffering of the mind and 
pain of the spirit. In the conflict between that principle of non- 
violence, which had become his very life-blood and meaning of 
existence, and India's freedom, which was a dominating and consum- 
ing passion for him, the scales inclined towards the latter. That 
did not mean, of course, that he weakened in his faith in non- 
violence. But it did mean that he was prepared to agree to the 
Congress not applying it in this war. The practical statesman took 
precedence over the uncompromising prophet. 

As I have watched and thought over this frequent struggle in 
Gandhi's mind, which has led often to so many seeming contradic- 

•447 



tions — and which affected me and my activities so intimately — I 
have remembered a passage in one of Liddell Hart's books: 'The 
idea of the indirect approach is closely related to all problems of 
the influence of mind over mind — the most inrluencial factor in 
human history. Yet it is hard to reconcile with another lesson: 
that true conclusions can only be reached, or approached, by 
pursuing the truth without regard to where it may lead or what 
its effect may be — on different interests. 

'History bears witness to the vital part that the "prophets" 
have played in human progress — which is evidence of the ultimate 
practical value of expressing unreservedly the truth as one sees it. 
Yet it also becomes clear that the acceptances and spreading of 
that vision has always depended on another class of men — 
"leaders" who had to be philosophical strategists, striking a compro- 
mise between truth and men's receptivity to it. Their effect has 
often depended on their own limitations in perceiving the truth 
as on their practical wisdom in proclaiming it. 

'The prophets must be stoned; that is their lot, and the test of 
their self-fulfilment. But a leader who is stoned may merely prove 
that he has failed in his function through a deficiency of wisdom, 
or through confusing his function with that of a prophet. Time 
alone can tell whether the effect of such a sacrifice redeems the 
apparent failure as a leader that does honour to him as a man. 
At the least he avoids the more common fault of leaders — that 
of sacrificing the truth to expediency without ultimate advantage 
to the cause. For whoever habitually suppresses the truth in the 
interests of tact will produce a deformity from the womb of his 
thought. 

'Is there a practical way of combining progress towards the 
attainment of truth with progress towards its acceptance? A 
possible solution of the problem is suggested by reflection on 
strategic principles — which point to the importance of maintain- 
ing an object consistently and, also, of pursuing it in a way adapted 
to circumstances. Opposition to the truth is inevitable, especially 
if it takes the form of a new idea, but the degree of resistance can 
be diminished — by giving thought not only to the aim but to the 
method of approach. Avoid a frontal attack on a long established 
position; instead seek to turn it by a flank movement, so that a 
more penetrable side is exposed to the thrust of truth. But, in any 
such indirect approach, take care not to diverge from the truth — 
for nothing is more fatal to its real advancement than to lapse into 
untruth. 

'Looking back on the stages by which various fresh ideas 
gained acceptance, it can be seen that the process was eased 
when they could be presented, not as something radically new, 
but as the revival in modern terms of a time-honoured principle 
or practice that had been forgotten. This, required not deception 

•448 



but care to trace the connection — since "there is nothing new 

under the sun." '* 

Tension 

In India tension grew in those early months of 1942. The theatre 
of war came ever nearer and there was now the probability of air 
raids over Indian cities. What was going to happen in those eastern 
countries where war was raging? What new development would 
take place in the relations between India and England? Were 
we going to carry on in the old way, glaring at each other, tied up 
and separated by the bitter memories of past history, victims of a 
tragic fate which none could avert? Or would common perils help 
us to bridge that chasm? Even the bazaars woke up from their 
normal lethargy, a wave of excitement passed over them and they 
buzzed with all manner of rumours. The monied classes were 
afraid of the future that was advancing so swiftly towards them, 
for that future, whatever else it might be, was likely to upset the 
social structure they were accustomed to and endanger their inter- 
ests and special position. The peasant and the worker had no such 
fear for he had little to lose, and he looked forward to any change 
from his present unhappy condition. 

In India there had all along been much sympathy for China 
and, as a consequence, a certain antipathy to Japan. The Pacific 
War, it was thought at first, would bring relief to China. For four 
and a half years China had fought single-handed against Japan; 
now she had powerful allies, and surely this must lighten her 
burden and lessen her danger. But those allies suffered blow after 
blow, and before the advancing Japanese armies the British colonial 
empire cracked up with amazing rapidity. Was this proud struc- 
ture thenjust a house of cards with no foundations or inner strength? 
Inevitably, comparisons were made with China's long resistance 
to Japanese aggression in spite of her lack of almost everything 
required for modern war. China went up in people's estimation, 
and though Japan was not liked, there was a feeling of satisfaction 
at the collapse of old-established European colonial powers before 
the armed strength of an Asiatic power. That racial, Oriental- 
Asiatic, feeling was evident on the British side also. Defeat and 
disaster were bitter enough but the fact that an Oriental and 
Asiatic power had triumphed over them added to the bitterness 
and humiliation. An Englishman occupying a high position said, 
that he would have preferred it if the Prince of Wales and the Repulse 
had been sunk by the Germans instead of by the yellow Japanese. 

The visit of the Chinese leaders, Generalissimo and Madame 
Chiang Kai-shek, was a great event in India. Official conventions 
and the wishes of the Government of India prevented them from 

*Liddell Hart: 'The Strategy of Indirect Approach' (1941), Preface. 

•449 



mixing with the people, but their presence in India itself at that 
critical stage and their manifest sympathy for India's freedom 
helped to bring India out of her national shell and increased her 
awareness of the international issues at stake. The bonds that tied 
India and China grew stronger, and so did the desire to line up 
with China and other nations against the common adversary. The 
peril to India helped to bring nationalism and internationalism 
close together, the only separating factor being the policy of the 
British Government. 

The Government of India were no doubt very conscious of the 
approaching perils; there must have been anxiety in their minds 
and a sense of urgency. But such was the conventional existence of 
the British in India, so set were they in their established grooves, 
so wedded to the never-ending processes of bureaucratic red-tape, 
that no marked change was visible in their outlook or activities. 
There was no sense ofhurry and speed, of tension and getting things 
done. The system they represented had been built up for another 
age and with other objectives. Whether it was their army or their 
civil services, the objective in view was the occupation of India 
and of suppression- of any attempts of the Indian people to free 
themselves. It was sufficient enough for that purpose, but modern 
war against a powerful and ruthless adversary was a very different 
matter, and they found it exceedingly difficult to adapt themselves 
to it. They were not only mentally unfitted for this, but a great 
part of their energies was absorbed in keeping down nationalism 
in India. The collapse of the Burmese and Malayan administra- 
tions before new problems had been significant and revealing, yet 
it taught no lesson. Burma had been governed by the same kind 
of civil service as India; indeed till a few years ago, it had been 
part of the Indian administration. The ways of government there 
were identical with those of India, and Burma had demonstrated 
how moribund this system was. But the system continued without 
change and the Viceroy and his high officials functioned in the 
same way as before. They added to their number many of the 
higher officials who had failed so conspicuously in Burma; there 
was another Excellency sitting on the hili-top at Simla. Like the 
imigri governments in London, we were given the privilege of 
having in our midst emigre officials from British colonies. They 
fitted like a glove into the British structure in India. 

Like shadows on a stage these high officials continued to function 
in their old way, trying to impress us with their elaborate imperial 
ritual, their court ceremonies, their durbars and investitures, 
their parades, their dinners and evening dresses, their pompous 
utterances. The Viceroy's house in New Delhi was the chief temple 
where the high priest officiated, but there were many other temples 
and priests. All this ceremonial and display of imperial pomp 
was designed to impress, and it had impressed our people in the 

•450 



old days, for Indians are also given to ceremonial observances. 
But new standards had arisen, different values had been created, 
and now this elaborate show was the subject ofjest and ridicule. 
Indians are supposed to be a slow-moving people, disinclined to 
rush and hurry, but even they had developed a certain speed and 
vigour in their work, so strong was their desire to get things done. 
The Congress provincial governments, whatever their failings 
might have been, were anxious to achieve results and worked haru 
and continuously, disregarding many old-established routines. 
It was irritating to see the passivity and slowness of the Government 
of India and its many agents in the face of grave crisis and peril. 

And then came the Americans. They were very much in a hurry, 
eager to get things done, ignorant of the ways and ceremonial 
of the Government of India and not particularly anxious to learn 
them. Intolerant of delay, they pushed aside obstructions and red- 
tape methods and upset the even tenor of life in New Delhi. They 
were not even careful of the dress they should wear on particular 
occasions, and sometimes offended against the rigid rules of protocol 
and official procedure. While the help they were bringing was 
very welcome, they were not liked in the highest official circles, 
and relations were strained. Indians liked them on the whole; 
their energy and enthusiasm for the work in hand were infectious, 
and contrasted with the lack of these qualities in British official 
circles in India. Their forthrightness and freedom from official 
constraints were appreciated. There was much silent amusement 
at the underlying friction between the newcomers and the official 
class, and many true or imagined stories of this were repeated. 

The approach of the war to India disturbed Gandhi greatly. 
It was not easy to fit in his policy and programme of non-violence 
with this new development. Obviously civil disobedience was out 
of the question in the face of an invading army or between two 
opposing armies. Passivity or acceptance of invasion were equally 
out of the question. What then? His own colleagues, and the 
Congress generally, had rejected non-violence for such an occasion 
or as an alternative to armed resistance to invasion, and he had 
at last agreed that they had a right to do so; but he was nonetheless 
troubled and for his own part, as an individual, he could not join 
any violent course of action. But he was much more than an indi- 
vidual; whether he had any official status or not in the nationalist 
movement, he occupied an outstanding and dominating position 
and his word carried weight with large numbers of people. 

Gandhiji knew India, and especially the Indian masses, as very 
few, if any, have known them in the past or the present. Not only 
had he widely travelled all over India and come into touch with 
millions of people, but there was something else which enabled 
him to come into emotional contact with those masses. He could 
merge himself with the masses and feel with them, and because they 

•451 



were conscious of this they gave him their devotion and loyalty. 
And yet his view of India was to some extent coloured by the out- 
look he had imbibed in his early days in Gujrat. The Gujratis 
were essentially a community of peaceful traders and merchants, 
influenced by the Jain doctrine of non-violence. Other parts of 
India had been influenced much less by this, and some not at all. 
The widespread Kshatriya class of warriors certainly did not allow 
it to interfere with war or hunting wild animals. Other classes also, 
including the Brahmins, had been as a whole little influenced by 
it. But Gandhiji took an eclectic view ofthe development of Indian 
thought and history, and believed that non-violence had been the 
basic principle underlying it, even though there had been many 
deviations from it. That view appeared to be far-fetched and many 
Indian thinkers and historians did not agree with it. This had 
nothing to do with the merits of non-violence in the present stage 
ofhuman existence, but it did indicate a historical bias in Gandhiji's 
mind. 

The accidents of geography have had a powerful effect on 
determining national character and history. The fact that India 
was cut off by the tremendous barrier of the Himalayas and by 
the sea produced a sense of unity in this wide area and at the same 
time bred exclusiveness. Over this vast territory a vivid and homo- 
genous civilization grew up which had plenty of scope for expansion 
and development, and which continued to preserve a strong cultural 
unity. Yet within that unity geography again produced diversity. 
The huge northern and central plain differed from the hilly and 
variegated areas ofthe Deccan, and the people living in different 
geographical areas developed different characteristics. History 
also took a different course in the north and in the south, though 
often the two overlapped and joined hands. The flatness of the land, 
and the vast open spaces ofthe north, as in Russia, required power- 
ful central governments for protection against external enemies. 
Empires flourished in the south as well as the north, but the north 
was really the centre of empire and often dominated the south. A 
strong central government in the old days inevitably meant auto- 
cracy. It was not a mere accident of history that the Mughal 
Empire was broken up, among other causes, by the Marathas. 
The Marathas came from the hilly tracts ofthe Deccan, and had 
preserved some spirit of independence when the great majority 
of the dwellers on the northern plains had grown servile and 
submissive. The British had an easy victory in Bengal, and the 
people of the fertile plains there submitted with extraordinary 
docility. Having established themselves there they spread elsewhere. 

Geography counts still and must count in the future, but other 
factors play a more important role now. Mountains and seas are 
no longer barriers, but they still determine a people's character 
and a country's political and economic position. They cannot be 

•452 



ignored in considering new schemes of division, partition or re-merg- 
ing, unless the planning is on a world scale. 

Gandhiji's knowledge of India and the Indian people is pro- 
found. Though not greatly interested in history as such, and per- 
haps not possessing that feeling for history, that historical sense, 
which some people have, he is fully conscious and intimately aware 
of the historical roots of the Indian people. He is well informed 
about current events and follows them carefully, though inevitably 
he concentrates on present-day Indian problems. He has a capa- 
city for picking out the essence of a problem or a situation, avoid- 
ing non-essentials. Judging everything by what he considers the 
moral aspect, he gets a certain grip and a longer perspective. 
Bernard Shaw has said that though he (Gandhi) may commit 
any number of tactical errors, his essential strategy continues 
to be right. Most people, however, are not much concerned with 
the long run; they are far more interested in the tactical advantage 
of the moment. 

Sir Stafford Cripps comes to India 

With the fall of Penang and Singapore, and as the Japanese 
advanced in Malaya, there was an exodus of Indians and others 
and they poured into India. They had to leave very suddenly, 
carrying nothing with them except the clothes they were in. Then 
followed the flood of refugees from Burma, hundreds of thousands 
of them, mostly Indians. The story of how they had been deserted 
by civil and other authorities and left to shift for themselves spread 
thoughout India. They trekked hundreds of miles across moun- 
tains and through dense forests, surrounded by enemies, many 
dying on the way, killed by dagger or disease or starvation. That 
was a horrible result of the war and had to be accepted. But it was 
not the war that caused discrimination in treatment between 
Indian and British refugees. The latter were cared for as far as 
possible and arrangements made for their transport and assistance. 
From one place in Burma, where vast numbers ofrefugees were 
gathering, there were two roads leading to India. The better one 
was reserved for Britishers or Europeans; it came to be known 
as the White Road. 

Horrible stories of racial discrimination and suffering reached 
us, and as the famished survivors spread out all over India they 
carried these stories with them, creating a powerful effect on the 
Indian mind. 

Just then Sir Stafford Cripps came to India with the proposals 
of the British War Cabinet. Those proposals have been discussed 
fully during the past two and a half years and they are past history 
already. It is a little difficult for one who took part in the negotia- 
tions that followed to deal with them in any detail without saying 

•453 



much that had better to be left unsaid till some future time. As 
a matter of fact all the relevant issues and considerations that 
arose have already been made public. 

I remember that when I read those proposals for the first time 
I was profoundly depressed, and that depression was largely due 
to the fact that I had expected something more substantial from 
Sir Stafford Cripps as well as from the critical situation that had 
arisen. The more I read those proposals and considered their 
many implications, the greater was my feeling of depression. 
I could understand a person unacquainted with Indian affairs 
imagining that they went far to meet our demands. But, when 
analysed, there were so many limitations, and the very acceptance 
of the principle of self-determination was fettered and circum- 
scribed in such a way as to imperil our future. 

The proposals dealt essentially with the future, after the cessa- 
tion of hostilities, though there was a final clause which vaguely 
invited co-operation in the present. That future, while asserting 
the principle of self-determination, gave the right to provinces 
not to join the Indian union, and to form separate independent 
states. Further, the same right of non-accession to the Indian 
union was given to the Indian states, and it should be remem- 
bered that there are nearly 600 such states in India, some major 
ones and the great majority tiny enclaves. These states, as well as 
the provinces, would all join in the constitution making, would 
influence that constitution, and then could walk out of it. The 
whole background would be of separatism and the real problems 
of the country, economic or political, would take secondary place. 
Reactionary elements, differing from each other in many ways, 
would unite to frustrate the evolution of a strong, progressive, 
unified national state. Under the constant threat of withdrawal, 
many undesirable provisions might be introduced into the consti- 
tution, the central government might be weakened and emasculated, 
and yet the withdrawal might still follow, and it would be difficult 
then to refashion the constitution and make it more workable for 
the remaining provinces and states. The elections in the provinces 
for the constitution-making body would take place under the 
existing system of separate religious electorates; that was un- 
fortunate, as it would bring with it the old spirit of cleavage, 
and yet, in the circumstances, it was inevitable. But in the states 
there was no provision for elections and their ninety million 
inhabitants were completely ignored. The semi-feudal rulers of 
the states could nominate their own representatives in propor- 
tion to the population. These nominees might contain some able 
ministers but, as a whole, they would inevitably represent, not 
the people of the states, but the feudal and autocratic ruler. They 
would form nearly one quarter of the members of the constitution- 
making body, and would powerfully influence its decisions by 

•454 



their numbers, their socially backward attitude, and their threats 
of subsequent withdrawal. The constituent assembly or consti- 
tution-making body would be a curious mixture of elected and 
non-elected elements, the former chosen by separate religious 
electorates as well as by certain vested interests, the latter nomi- 
nated by the rulers of the states. To this had to be added the fact 
that there would be no pressure to accept joint decision, and the 
sense of reality which comes from evolving integrates and final 
decisions would be lacking. The tendency for many of its mem- 
bers would be to act in a wholly irresponsible manner, for they 
would feel-that they could always withdraw and refuse to accept 
the responsibility for carrying out those decisions. 

Any proposal to cut up India into parts was a painful one to 
contemplate; it went against all those deeply-felt sentiments and 
convictions that move people so powerfully. The whole national- 
ist movement of India had been based on India's unity, but the 
sentiment was older and deeper than the present phase of natio- 
nalism ; it went far back into the remote periods of Indian history. 
That belief and sentiment had been strengthened by modern 
developments till it had become an article of faith for vast num- 
bers of people, something that could not be challenged or contro- 
verted. A challenge had come from the Moslem League but few 
took it seriously, and there were certainly large numbers of Mos- 
lems who did not agree with it. Even the basis of that challenge 
was not really territorial, though it suggested a vague undefined 
partition of territory. The basis was a mediaeval conception of 
nations based on religious differences, and according to it, there- 
fore, in every village in India there were two or more nations. 
Even a partition of India could not get over these widespread 
and overlapping religious divisions. A partition would in fact add 
to the difficulty and increase the very problems it was intended 
to solve. 

Apart from sentiment, there were solid reasons against parti- 
tion. The social and economic problems of India had reached 
a crisis, chiefly because of the policy of the British Government, 
which necessitated rapid and all-round progress if the gravest 
of disasters had to be averted. That progress could only take place 
with real and effective planning for the whole of India, for the 
various parts supplied each other's deficiencies. As a whole, India 
was to a large extent a powerful and self-sufficient unit, but each 
part by itselfwould be weak and dependent on others. If all these, 
and other, arguments were valid and sufficient in the past, they 
became doubly important through modern political and economic 
developments. Small states were disappearing everywhere as 
independent entities; they were becoming absorbed in, or eco- 
nomic appendages to, the larger states. There was an inevitable 
tendency for vast federations, or collections of many states func- 



tioning together, to grow up. The idea of the national state itself 
was giving place to the multi-national state, and in the distant 
future there appeared a vision of a world federation. To think of 
partitioning India at this stage went against the whole current of 
modern historical and economic development. It seemed to be 
fantastic in the extreme. 

And yet under stress of dire necessity or some compelling 
disaster one has to agree to many undesirable things. Circum- 
stances may force a partition of what logically and normally must 
not be divided. But the proposals put forward on behalf of the 
British Government did not deal with any definite and particular 
partition of India. They opened out a vista of an indefinite num- 
ber of partitions both of provinces and states. They incited all the 
reactionary, feudal, and socially backward groups to claim parti- 
tion. Probably none of them seriously wanted it because they 
could not stand by themselves. But they could give a lot of trouble 
and obstruct and delay the formation of a free Indian state. If 
they were backed by British policy, as they well might be, it meant 
no freedom at all for a long time. Our experience of that policy 
had been bitter and at every stage we had found that it encouraged 
fissiparous tendencies. What was the guarantee that it would not 
continue to do so, and then claim that it could not fulfil its promise 
because the conditions for it were lacking? Indeed the probability 
was that this policy would continue. 

Thus this proposal was not a mere acceptance of Pakistan or 
a particular partition, bad as that would have been, but some- 
thing much worse, opening the door to the possibility of an inde- 
finite number of partitions. It was a continuing menace to the 
freedom of India and a barrier to the fulfilment of the very pro- 
mise that had been made. 

The decision about the future of the Indian states was not 
going to be made by the people of those states or their chosen 
representatives, but by their autocratic rulers. Our acceptance 
of this principle would have been a negation of our well-estab- 
lished and often repeated policy and a betrayal of the people of 
the states, who would have been condemned to autocratic rule 
for a much longer period. We were prepared to treat the princes 
as gently as possible so as to gain their co-operation in the change- 
over to democracy, and if there had been no third party, like the 
British power, we would no doubt have succeeded. But with the 
British Government supporting autocracy in the states, the princes 
were likely to keep out of the Indian Union and rely on British 
military support for protection against their own people. Indeed, 
we were told, that if such circumstances arose, foreign armed 
forces would be kept in the states. As these states were often likely 
to be isolated islands in the territory of the proposed Indian Union, 
the question arose how foreign forces could reach them or com- 

•456 



municate with the forces in some other similar state. That neces- 
sitated a right of way for foreign forces over the territory of the 
Indian Union. 

Gandhiji had repeatedly declared that he was no enemy of the 
princes. Indeed his attitude has been consistently a friendly one 
towards them, though he had often criticized their methods of 
government and their denial of even elementary rights to their 
people. For many years he had prevented the Congress from in- 
terfering directly with the affairs of the states, believing as he did 
that the people of the states should themselves take the initiative 
and thus develop self-confidence and strength. Many of us had 
disapproved of this attitude of his. Yet behind it lay one basic 
conviction, as he put it himself: 'One fundamental element in 
my attitude is that I shall never be a party to the sale of the 
rights of the people of the states (even) for the sake of the freedom 
of the people of British India.' Professor Berriedale Keith, the 
eminent authority on the British Commonwealth and Indian 
constitutions, supported Gandhiji's claim (which was the Con- 
gress claim) in regard to the states. Keith wrote: 'It is impossible 
for the Crown's advisers to contend that the people of the states 
shall be denied the rights of Indians in the provinces, and it is their 
clear duty to advise the King-Emperor to use his authority to 
secure that the princes shall enter into constitutional reforms 
which will result at no distant date in securing responsible govern- 
ment therein. No federation can be deemed in the interest of India, 
if in it representatives of the provinces are compelled to sit with 
the nominees of irresponsible rulers. There is, in fact, no answer 
to Mr. Gandhi's claim that the princes are bound to follow the 
Crown in its transfer of authority to the people.' Professor Keith 
had given this opinion in regard to the earlier proposal of the 
British Government relating to federation, but it was even more 
applicable to the proposals brought by Sir Stafford Cripps. 

The more one thought of these proposals the more fantastic 
they grew. India became a chequer-board containing scores of 
nominally independent or semi-independent states, many of them 
relying on Britain for military protection of autocratic rule. There 
was to be neither political nor economic unity and Britain might 
well continue to exercise dominating power, both politically and 
economically, through the many petty states she controlled.* 

What the British War Cabinet had in mind for the future I do 
not know. I think Sir Stafford Cripps meant well for India and 
hoped to see her free and united. But this was not a matter of 

* The entire dependence of the Indian States on British power and protection is stressed by 
Sir Geoffrey de Montmorency in his ' The Indian States and Indian Federation 1 (1942): 
The states 'are still so numerous in India that they offer a grave conundrum in evolution to 
which no solution is at present forthcoming.. .. Their disappearance and absorption would, of 
course, be inevitable if Britain ever ceased to be the supreme power as regards India.' 

•457 



individual views or opinions or personal goodwill. We had to 
consider a state document, carefully drafted in spite of its deli- 
berate vagueness, and we were told that we had to accept it or 
reject it as a whole. And behind it lay the continuous, century-old 
policy of the British Government, creating division in India and 
encouraging every factor that came in the way of national growth 
and freedom. Every forward step that had been taken in the past 
had always been hedged in by qualifications and limitations, which 
seemed innocuous enough at the beginning, and yet which proved 
to be formidable checks and brakes. 

It was possible, and even probable, that the dire consequences 
that seemed to flow from the proposals need not all take shape. 
Wisdom and patriotism, and a larger view of what was good 
for India and the world, would no doubt influence many people, 
including rulers and ministers of Indian states. Left to ourselves, 
we would have faced each other with confidence, considered all 
the complexities of the problem and the difficulties that faced each 
group, and after full deliberation hammered out an integrated 
solution. But we were not going to be left to ourselves in spite of 
the suggestion that we were going to exercise self-determination. 
The British Government was always there, occupying strategic 
points, in a position to hinder and interfere in many ways. It con- 
trolled not only the whole apparatus of government, services, etc., 
but, in the states, its residents and political agents occupied a domi- 
nating position. Indeed the princes, autocratic as they were as 
regards their people, were themselves completely subject to the 
control of the political department which was directly under the 
Viceroy. Many of their principal ministers had been imposed upon 
them and were members of British services. 

Even if we escaped many of the possible consequences of the 
British proposals, enough remained to undermine Indian free- 
dom, delay progress, and raise fresh and dangerous problems 
which would create enormous difficulties. The introduction of 
separate religious electorates a generation or more earlier had 
played enough mischief; now the door was opened to every 
obscurantist group giving trouble, and to the fear of continuing 
division and vivisection of India. We were asked to pledge our- 
selves to this arrangement for that undetermined future which was 
to emerge as the issue of the war. Not only the National Con- 
gress but politically the most moderate of our politicians, who 
had always co-operated with the British government, expressed 
their inability to do so. And yet the Congress, for all its passion for 
Indian unity, was anxious to win over the minority and other 
groups and even declared that a territorial unit could not be kept 
in the Indian Union against the declared will of its people. It 
accepted the principle even of partition, if this became unavoid- 
able, but it did not want to encourage it in any way. The Work- 

•458 



ing Committee of the Congress, in the course of its resolution on 
the Cripps proposals, said: 'The Congress has been wedded to 
Indian freedom and unity and any break in that unity, especially 
in the modern world, when people's minds inevitably think in 
terms of ever larger federations, would be injurious to all concern- 
ed and exceedingly painful to contemplate. Nevertheless the 
Committee cannot think in terms of compelling the people in any 
territorial unit to remain in an Indian Union against their dec- 
lared and established will. While recognizing this principle, the 
Committee feel that every effort should be made to create condi- 
tions which would help the different units in developing a common 
and co-operative national life. The acceptance of the principle 
inevitably involves that no changes should be made which result 
in fresh problems being created and compulsion being exercised 
on other substantial groups within that area. Each territorial unit 
should have the fullest possible autonomy within the union, con- 
sistent with a strong national state. The proposal now made on the 
part of the British War Cabinet encourages and will lead to at- 
tempts at separation at the very inception of a union and thus 
create friction just when the utmost co-operation and goodwill 
are most needed. This proposal has been presumably made to 
meet a communal demand, but it will have other consequences 
also and lead politically reactionary and obscurantist groups 
among different communities to create trouble and divert public 
attention from the vital issues before the country.' 

The Committee went on to say that 'in to-day's grave crisis, 
it is the present that counts, and even proposals for the future 
are important in so far as they affect the present. Although they 
had been unable to agree to the proposals made for the future, 
they were anxious to come to some settlement so that, as they said, 
India might shoulder the burden of her defence worthily. There 
was no question of non-violence involved and no mention of this 
was made at any stage. In fact one of the matters discussed was 
that there should be an Indian Minister of Defence. 

The Congress position at this stage was that in view of the 
imminent war peril to India they were prepared to put aside 
questions about the future and concentrate on the formation of 
a national government which would co-operate fully in the war. 
They could not agree to the British Government's specific pro- 
posals for the future as these involved all manner of dangerous 
commitments. So far as they were concerned, these proposals 
could be withdrawn or might remain as an indication of British 
intention, it being clearly understood that the Congress did not 
accept them. But this need not come in the way of finding a method 
for present co-operation. 

So far as the present was concerned, the British War Cabinet's 
proposals were vague and incomplete, except that they made 

•459 



it clear that the defence of India must remain the sole charge 
of the British Government. From Sir Stafford Cripps' repeated 
statements it appeared that except for defence all other subjects 
would be transferred to effective Indian control. There was even 
mention of the Viceroy functioning merely as a constitutional 
head, like the King of England. This led us to imagine that the 
only issue that remained for consideration was that of defence. 
Our position was that defence in war time might be made to 
cover, and to a large extent did cover, most other national acti- 
vities and functions. If defence was wholly removed from the scope 
of the national government's work, very little might remain. 
It was agreed that the British Commander-in-Chief would con- 
tinue to exercise full authority over the armed forces and military 
operations. It was also agreed that the general strategy would be 
directed by the Imperial staff. Apart from this, it was claimed 
that there should be a Defence Member of the national govern- 
ment. 

After some discussion it was agreed by Sir Stafford that there 
might be a Defence Department under an Indian member, but 
the matters to be dealt with by this department were: public rela- 
tions, petroleum, canteens, stationery and printing, social arrange- 
ments for foreign missions, amenities for troops, etc. This list 
was remarkable and made the position of an Indian Defence 
Member ludicrous. Further discussions led to a somewhat differ- 
ent approach. There still seemed to be a considerable gap bet- 
ween the two viewpoints, but we seemed to be moving towards 
one another. For the first time I felt, and so did others, that a 
settlement was probable. The deepening crisis in the war situa- 
tion was a continuous spur to all of us to come to an agreement*. 

The peril of war and invasion was great and had in any event 
to be met. Yet there were different ways of meeting it, or rather 
there was only one really effective way of doing so in the present, 
and much more so for the future. We felt that the psychological 
moment might pass, not only bringing present dangers in its train 
but also adding to the greater dangers of the future. New weapons 
were necessary as well as old, new ways of using them, new enthu- 
siasms, new horizons, a new faith in a future that was going to be 
essentially different from the past and the present, and the proof 
of it lay in a change in the present. Perhaps our eagerness fed our 
optimism and made us forget for a while or minimize the width 
and depth of the formidable chasm that separated us from 
Britain's rulers. It was not so easy for the centuries-old conflict 
to be resolved even in face of peril and disaster; it had never been 
easy for an imperial power to loosen its grip on its subject domi- 
nions unless forced to do so. Had circumstances produced that 
force, that conviction? We did not know, but we hoped it might 
be so. 

•460 



And then, just when I was most hopeful, all manner of odd 
things began to happen. Lord Halifax, speaking somewhere in 
the U.S.A., made a violent attack on the National Congress. Why 
he should do so just then in far America was not obvious, but he 
could hardly speak in that manner, when he presented the views 
and policy of the British Government. In Delhi it was well known 
that the Viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, and the high officials of the 
Civil Service were strongly opposed to a settlement and to a lessen- 
ing of their powers. Much happened which was only vaguely 
known. 

When we met Sir Stafford Cripps again to discuss the latest 
formula about the functions of the Defence Minister, it transpir- 
ed that all our previous talk was entirely beside the point, as 
there were going to be no ministers with any power. The exist- 
ing Viceroy's Executive Council was to continue, and all that was 
contemplated was to appoint additional Indians, representing 
political parties, to this Council. The Council was in no sense 
a cabinet; it was just a group of heads of departments or secre- 
taries, and all power was concentrated in the Viceroy's hands. 
We realized that legal changes take time and we had not there- 
fore pressed for them, but we insisted that a convention should 
be observed that the Viceroy was to treat this Council as a cabi- 
net and accept its decisions. We were now told that this was not 
possible and the Viceroy's powers must remain unaltered not 
only in theory but in practice. This was an astonishing develop- 
ment which we could hardly credit, for all our previous talks had 
taken place on a different basis. 

We discussed how we could increase India's powers of resist- 
ance against invasion. We were anxious to make the Indian army 
feel that it was a national army and thus to introduce a patriotic 
element in the war. Also to build up new armies, militias, home 
guards, etc., rapidly for home defence in case of invasion. All these 
would of course function under the Commander-in-Chief. We 
were told that we could not do so. The Indian army was really 
a part and section of the British army and it could not be consi- 
dered, or even referred to, as a national army. It was further 
doubtful if we could be allowed to raise any separate forces like 
militias or home guards. 

So it all came to this, that the existing structure of government 
would continue exactly as before, the autocratic powers- of the 
Viceroy would remain, and a few of us could become his liveried 
camp-followers and look after canteens and the like. There was 
not an atom of difference between this and what Mr. Amery had 
offered eighteen months earlier, which had seemed to us then an 
affront to India. It was true that there would be a psychological 
change after all that had happened, and individuals make a diffe- 
rence. Strong and capable men would function differently from 

•461 



the servile breed that usually surrounded the viceregal throne. 

But it was inconceivable and impossible for us to accept this 
position at any time and more specially at that time. If we had 
ventured to do so we would have been disowned and rejected by 
our own people. As a matter of fact, when later the facts were 
known to the public, there was an outcry against the many con- 
cessions we had agreed to in the course of the negotiations. 

In the whole course of our talks with Sir Stafford Cripps, the 
so-called minority or communal issue was at no time raised or 
considered. Indeed it did not arise at that stage. It was an impor- 
tant issue in considering future constitutional changes, but these 
had been deliberately put aside after our initial reaction to the 
British proposals. If the principle of an effective transfer of power 
to a national government had been agreed to, then the question 
would no doubt have arisen as to the relative strengths ofthe various 
groups represented in it. But as we never reached the stage of 
agreement on that principle, the other question did not arise and 
was not considered at all. So far as we were concerned, we were so 
anxious to have an effective national government enjoying the 
confidence of the principal parties, that we felt that the question 
of proportions would not give much trouble. Maulana Abul 
Kalam Azad, the Congress president, in a letter to Sir Stafford 
Cripps had said: 'We would point out to you that the suggestions 
we have put forward are not ours only but may be considered to 
be the unanimous demand ofthe Indian people. On these matters 
there is no difference of opinion among various groups and parties, 
and the difference is as between the Indian people as a whole and 
the British Government. Such differences as exist in India relate 
to constitutional changes in the future. We are agreeable to the 
postponement of this issue so that the largest possible measure 
of unity might be achieved in the present crisis for the defence 
of India. It would be a tragedy that even when theie is this 
unanimity of opinion in India, the British Government should 
prevent a free national government from functioning and from 
serving the cause of India as well as the larger causes for which 
millions are suffering and dying to-day.' 

In a subsequent and final letter of the Congress president 
it was stated: 'We are not interested in the Congress as such 
gaining power, but we are interested in the Indian people as a 

whole having freedom and power We are convinced that if 

the British Government did not pursue a policy of encouraging 
disruption, all of us, to whatever party or group we belonged, 
would be able to come together and find a common line of action. 
But, unhappily, even in this grave hour ofperil, the British Govern- 
ment is unable to give up its wrecking policy. We are driven to 
the conclusion that it attaches more importance to holding on to 
its rule in India, as long as it can, and promoting discord and 

•402 



disruption here with that end in view, than to an effective defence 
of India against the aggression and invasion that overhang us. 
To us, and to all Indians, the dominant consideration is the defence 
and safety of India, and it is by that test that we judge.' 

In this letter he also made clear our position in regard to defence. 
'No one has suggested any restrictions on the normal powers of the 
Commander-in-Chief. Indeed we went beyond this and were 
prepared to agree to further powers being given to him as war 
minister. But it is clear that the British Government's conception 
and ours in regard to defence differ greatly. For us it means giving 
it a national character and calling upon every man and woman 
in India to participate in it. It means trusting our own people 
and seeking their full co-operation in this great effort. The British 
Government's view seems to be based on an utter lack of confidence 
in the Indian people and in withholding real power from them. 
You refer to the paramount duty and responsibility of His Majesty's 
Government in regard to defence. That duty and responsibility 
cannot be discharged effectively unless the Indian people are 
made to have and feel their responsibility, and the recent past 
stands witness to this. The Government of India do not realise 
that the war can only be fought on a popular basis.' 

Almost immediately after this last letter of the Congress pre- 
sident, Sir Stafford Cripps returned to England by air. But before 
he did so, and on his return, he made certain statements to the 
public which were contrary to the facts and which were bitterly 
resented in India. In spite of contradiction by responsible persons 
in India, these statements were repeated by Sir Stafford and others. 

The British proposals had been rejected, not by the Congress 
only, but by every single party or group in India. Even the 
most moderate of our politicians had expressed their disapproval 
of them. Apart from the Moslem League, the reasons for dis- 
approval were more or less the same. The Moslem League, 
as has been its custom, waited for others to express their opinions 
and then, for its own reasons, rejected the proposals. 

It was stated in the British Parliament and elsewhere that 
the rejection by the Congress was due to the uncompromising 
attitude of Gandhiji. This is wholly untrue. Gandhiji had strongly 
disapproved, in common with most others, of the indefinite and 
innumerable partitions that the proposals involved, and of the way 
in which the ninety million people of the Indian states had been 
allowed no say in their future. All the subsequent negotiations, 
which dealt with changes in the present and not with the future, 
took place in his absence, as he had to leave because of his wife's 
illness, and he had nothing whatever to do with them. The Congress 
Working Committee had, on several previous occasions, disagreed 
with him on the question of non-violence, and was anxious to 
have a National Government to co-operate in the war and 

•463 



especially in the defence of India. 

The war was the dominant issue and thought in men's minds, 
and the invasion of India seemed imminent. And yet it was not 
the war that came in the way of agreement, for that war would 
inevitably have to be conducted by experts and not by laymen. 
On the conduct of the war itself it was easy to come to an agree- 
ment. The real question was the transfer of power to the National 
Government. It was the old issue of Indian nationalism versus 
British imperialism, and on that issue, war or no war, the British 
governing class in England and in India was determined to hold 
on to what it had. Behind them stood the imposing figure of Mr. 
Winston Churchill. 

Frustration 

The abrupt termination of the Cripps' negotiations and Sir 
Stafford's sudden departure came as a surprise. Was it to make 
this feeble offer, which turned out to be, so far as the present 
was concerned, a mere repetition of what had been repeatedly 
said before — was it for this that a member of the British War 
Cabinet had journeyed to India? Or had all this been done 
merely as a propaganda stunt for the people of the U.S.A.? 
The reaction was strong and bitter. There was no hope of a 
settlement with Britain; no chance was given to the people of 
India even to defend their country against invasion as they wanted to. 

Meanwhile the chances of that invasion were growing and 
hordes of starving Indian refugees were pouring across the eastern 
frontiers of India. In eastern Bengal, in a panicky state of mind 
in anticipation of an invasion, tens of thousands of river boats were 
destroyed. (It was subsequently stated that this had been done by 
a mistaken interpretation of an official order.) That vast area was 
full of waterways and the only transport possible was by these boats. 
Their destruction isolated large communities, destroyed their 
means of livelihood and transport, and was one of the contributory 
causes of the Bengal famine. Preparations were made for large- 
scale withdrawals from Bengal, and a repetition of what had 
happened in Rangoon and Lower Burma seemed probable. In the 
city of Madras a vague and unconfirmed (and, as it turned out, 
a false) rumour of the approach of a Japanese fleet led to the 
sudden departure of high Government officials and even to a 
partial destruction of harbour facilities. It seemed that the civi- 
lian administration of India was suffering from a nervous break- 
down. It was strong only in its suppression of Indian nationalism. 

What were we to do? We could not tolerate any part of India 
submitting tamely to invasion. So far as armed resistance was 
concerned that was a matter for the army and air force, such as 
they were. American help was pouring in, especially in the shape 

•464 



of aircraft, and was slowly changing the military situation. The 
only way we could have helped was by changing the whole 
atmosphere of the home front, by creating enthusiasm in the 
people and a fierce desire to resist at all costs, by building up 
citizen forces for this purpose and home guards and the like. That 
had been made terribly difficult for us by British policy. Even 
on the eve of invasion no Indian outside the regular army could 
be trusted with a gun, and even our attempts to organize un- 
armed self-defence units in villages were disapproved and some- 
times suppressed. Far from encouraging the organization of popular 
resistance the British authorities were afraid of this, for they had 
long been accustomed to look upon all popular self-defence orga- 
nization as seditious and dangerous to British rule. They had 
to follow their old policy, for the only alternative was to accept 
a national government relying on the people and organizing them 
for defence. This alternative had been definitely rejected by them 
and there was no middle course or half-way house. Inevitably they 
were led to treat the people as chattels, who were to be allowed no 
initiative and were to be used and disposed of entirely according 
to their own wishes. The All-India Congress Committee, which 
met at the end of April, 1942, declared its deep resentment at 
this policy and treatment, and said that it could never accept a 
position which involved our functioning as slaves of foreign autho- 
rity. 

Nevertheless, we could not remain silent and inert spectators 
of the tragedy that seemed to be imminent. We had to advise 
the people, the vast masses of the civilian population, as to what 
they should do in case of invasion. We told them that in spite of 
their indignation against British policy they must not interfere 
in any way with the operations of the British or allied armed 
forces, as this would be giving indirect aid to the enemy aggres- 
sor. Further, that they must on no account submit to the inva- 
der, or obey his orders, or accept any favours from him. If the 
invading forces sought to take possession of the people's homes 
and fields they must be resisted even unto death. This resistance 
was to be peaceful; it was to be the completest form of non-co- 
operation with the enemy. 

Many people criticized with considerable sarcasm what seemed 
to them the absurd notion of resisting an invading army with 
these methods of non-violent non-co-operation. Yet far from 
being absurd, it was the only method, and a very brave method, 
left to the people. The advice was not offered to the armed forces, 
nor was peaceful resistance put forward as an alternative to 
armed resistance. That advice was meant only for the unarmed 
civilian population, which almost invariably submits to the invader 
when its armed forces are defeated or withdrawn. Apart from 
the regular armed forces, it is possible to organize guerrilla units 

•465 



to harass the enemy. But this was not possible for us, for it requires 
training, arms, and the full co-operation of the regular army. 
And even if some guerrilla units could have been trained the rest 
of the population remained. Normally the civilian population is 
expected to submit to enemy occupation. Indeed, it was known 
that directions had been issued by British authorities in certain 
threatened areas advising submission, even by some of the petty 
officials, to the enemy when the army and the higher officials 
withdrew. 

We knew perfectly well that peaceful non-cooperation could 
not stop an advancing enemy force. We knew also that most of 
the civilian inhabitants would find it difficult to resist even if they 
wanted to do so. Nevertheless we hoped that some leading perso- 
nalities in the towns and villages occuped by the enemy would 
refuse to submit or carry out the enemy's orders or help in getting 
provisions or in any other way. That would have meant swift 
punishment for them, very probably death as well as reprisals. 
We expected this non-submission and resistance to death of even 
a limited number of persons to have a powerful effect on the 
general population, not only in the area concerned but in the 
rest of India. Thus we hoped that a national spirit of resistance 
might be built up. 

For some months previously we had been organizing, often in 
the face of official opposition, food committees and self-defence 
units in towns and villages. The food problem was troubling us 
and we feared a crisis in view of the increasing difficulties of 
transport and Other developments of the war situation. Govern- 
ment was doing next to nothing in regard to this. We tried to 
organize self-sufficient units, especially in the rural areas, and to 
encourage primitive methods of transport by bullock-cart in case 
modern methods failed. There was also the possibility of large 
numbers of refugees and evacuees suddenly marching west, as 
they had done in China, in case of invasion from the east. We 
tried to prepare ourselves to receive them and provide for them. 
All this was exceedingly difficult, indeed hardly possible, without 
the co-operation of the Government, yet we made such attempts 
as we could. The purpose of the self-defence units was to help 
in these tasks and to prevent panic and keep order in their res- 
pective areas. Air raids and the news of invasion, even in a distant 
area, 'might well cause panic in the civilian population, and it was 
important to stop this. The official measures taken in this behalf 
were totally insufficient and looked upon with distrust by the 
public. In the rural areas dacoities and robberies were on the 
increase. 

We made these vast plans and in a small measure gave effect 
to them, but it was obvious that we were only scratching the sur- 
face of the tremendous problem which confronted us. A real solu- 

•466 



tion could come only through complete co-operation between 
the governmental apparatus and the people, and that had been 
found to be impossible. 

It was a heart-breaking situation, for while the crisis called 
to us and we were bubbling over with the desire to act, effective 
action was denied us. Catastrophe and disaster advanced with 
tremendous strides towards us while India lay helpless and inert, 
bitter and sullen, a battle ground for rival and foreign forces. 

Much as I hated war, the prospect of a Japanese invasion of 
India had in no way frightened me. At the back of my mind I 
was in a sense attracted to this coming of war, horrible as it was, 
to India. For I wanted a tremendous shake-up, a personal experi- 
ence for millions of people, which would drag them out of that 
peace of the grave that Britain had imposed upon us. Something 
that would force them to face the reality of to-day and to outgrow 
the past which clung to them so tenaciously, to get beyond the 
petty political squabbles and exaggerations of temporary prob- 
lems which filled their minds. Not to break with the past, and yet 
not to live in it; realise the present and look to the future.. . .To 
change the rhythm of life and make it in tune with this present 
and future. The cost of war was heavy, and the consequences full 
of uncertainty. That war was not of our seeking, but since it had 
come, it could be made to harden the fibre of the nation and provide 
those vital experiences out of which a new life might blossom forth. 
Vast numbers would die, that was inevitable, but it is better to 
die in war than through famine; it is better to die than to live 
a miserable, hopeless life. Out of death, life is born afresh, and 
individuals and nations who do not know how to die, do not know 
also how to live. 'Only where there are graves are there resur- 
rections.' 

But though the war had come to India, it had brought no 
exhilaration of the spirit to us, no pouring out of our energies in 
some glad endeavour, when pain and death were forgotten and 
self itself ignored and only the cause of freedom counted and the 
vision of the future that lay beyond. Only the suffering and sor- 
row were for us, and an awareness of impending disaster which 
sharpened our perceptions and quickened pain, and which we 
could not even help to avert. A brooding sense of inevitable and 
ineluctable tragedy grew upon us, a tragedy that was both perso- 
nal and national. 

This had nothing to do with victory or defeat in the war, with 
who won and who lost. We did not want the Axis powecs to win, 
for that led to certain disaster; we did not want the Japanese to 
enter or occupy any part of India. That had to be resisted any- 
how, and we repeatedly impressed the public with this fact, but 
all this was a negative approach. What positive aim was there 
in this war, what future would emerge out of it? Was it just a 

•467 



repetition of past follies and disasters, a play of nature's blind 
forces which took no cognizance of man's wishes and ideals? 
What was going to be the fate of India? 

We thought of Rabindranath Tagore's last testament, his de- 
ath-bed message given the year before: '...the demon of barb- 
arity has given up all pretence and has emerged with uncon- 
cealed fangs ready to tear up humanity in an orgy of devastation. 
From one end of the world to the other the poisonous fumes 
of hatred darken the atmosphere. The spirit of violence which 
perhaps lay dormant in the psychology of the west has at last 
roused itself and desecrated the spirit of man. 

'The wheels of fate will some day compel the English to give 
up their Indian empire. But what kind of India will they leave 
behind, what stark misery? When the stream of their centuries' 
administration runs dry at last, what a waste of mud and filth 
they will leave behind! I had one time believed that the springs 
of civilization would issue out of the heart of Europe. But to-day 
when I am about to quit the world that faith has gone bankrupt 
altogether. 

'As I look round I see the crumbling ruins of a proud civiliza- 
tion strewn like a vast heap of futility. And yet I shall not commit 
the grievous sin of losing faith in man. I would rather look forward 
to the opening of a new chapter in his history after the cataclysm 
is over and the atmosphere rendered clean with the spirit of service 
and sacrifice. Perhaps that dawn will come from this horizon, 
from the east where the sun rises. A day will come when un- 
vanquished man will retrace his path of conquest, despite all bar- 
riers, to win back his lost human heritage. 

'To-day we witness the perils which attend on the insolence 
of might; one day shall be borne out the full truth of what the 
sages have proclaimed: "By unrighteousness man prospers, gains 
what appears desirable, conquers enemies, but perishes at the 
root." ' 

No, one may not lose faith in man. God we may deny, but 
what hope is there for us if we deny man and thus reduce every- 
thing to futility? Yet it was difficult to have faith in anything or 
to believe that the triumph of righteousness is inevitable. 

Weary of body and troubled in mind I sought escape from my 
surroundings and journeyed to Kulu in the inner valleys of the 
Himalayas. 

The Challenge: Quit India Resolution 

On my return from Kulu after a fortnight's absence I realized 
that the internal situation was changing rapidly. The reaction 
from the failure of the last attempt at a settlement had grown 
and there was a feeling that no hope lay in that direction. British 

•468 



official statements in Parliament and elsewhere had confirmed 
that view and angered the people. Official policy in India was 
definitely aiming at the suppression of our normal political and 
public activities and there was an all-round tightening of pressure. 
Many of our workers had remained in prison throughout the 
Cripps negotiations; now some of the nearest and most important 
of my friends and colleagues had been arrested and imprisoned 
under the Defence of India Act. Rafi Ahmad Kidwai was arrested 
early in May. Shri Krishnadat Palliwal, president of the United 
Provinces Provincial Congress committee, followed soon after, 
and so did many others. It seemed that most of us would be picked 
off in this way and removed from the scene of action, and our 
national movement prevented from functioning and gradually 
disintegrated. Could we submit to all this passively? We had 
not been trained that way, and both our personal and national 
pride rose in revolt against this treatment. 

But what could we do in view of the grave war crisis and possi- 
bility of invasion? Yet inaction was no service even to this cause, for 
it was leading to the growth of sentiments which we viewed with 
anxiety and apprehension. There were many trends in public 
opinion, as was natural in such a vast country and at such a time 
of crisis. Actual pro-Japanese sentiment was practically nil, for 
no one wanted to change masters, and pro-Chinese feelings were 
strong and widespread. But there was a small group which was 
indirectly pro-Japanese in the sense that it imagined that it could 
take advantage of a Japanese invasion for Indian freedom. They 
were influenced by the broadcasts being made by Subhas Chandra 
Bose who had secretly escaped from India the year before. Most 
people were, of course, just passive, dumbly awaiting developments. 
If unfortunately circumstances so fashioned themselves that a part 
of India was under the invader's control, then there would un- 
doubtedly be many collaborators, especially among the upper 
income groups, whose ruling passion was to save themselves and 
their property. That breed and mentality of collaborators had 
been cherished and encouraged by the British Government in 
India in the past for its own purposes, and they could adapt them- 
selves to changing circumstances, always keeping their own per- 
sonal interests in view. We had seen collaboration in full flood 
even in France and Belgium and Norway and many of the occu- 
pied countries of Europe, in spite of growing resistance movements. 
We had seen how the men of Vichy had (in Pertinax's words) 
'racked their brains to palm off shame as honour, cowardice as 
courage, pusillanimity and ignorance as wisdom, humiliation as 
virtue, and wholehearted acceptance of the German victory as 
moral regeneration.' If that had been so in France, that country of 
revolution and fiery patriotism, it was certainly not unlikely 
among similar classes in India, where the mentality of collabora- 

•469 



tion had flourished for so long under British patronage and 
brought so many rewards. Indeed it was highly likely that chief 
among those who might collaborate with the invader would be 
many of the persons who had been collaborating with British 
rule and who proclaimed their loyalty to that rule from the 
house tops. They had perfected the art of collaboration and would 
find no difficulty in holding on to that basis even though the 
superstructure changed. Arid if subsequently there was yet ano- 
ther change of that superstructure, well they would readapt them- 
selves again as others of their kind were doing in Europe. When 
necessity arose they could take advantage of the anti-British 
feelings that had grown more powerful than ever after the failure 
of the Cripps negotiations. So would others also, not for personal 
and opportunist reasons but pushed on by different motives, 
losing all perspective and forgetting the larger issues. These deve- 
lopments filled us with dismay and we felt that the growth of 
enforced and sullen submission to British policy in India would 
lead to all manner of dangerous consequences and the complete 
degradation of the people. 

There was a fairly widespread feeling that in case of attempted 
invasion and occupation of some eastern areas, there would be 
a breakdown of the civil administration over larger areas else- 
where, leading to chaotic conditions. What had happened in 
Malaya and Burma was before us. Hardly anyone expected any 
considerable part of the country to be occupied by the enemy 
even if the chances of war favoured him. India was vast, and we 
had seen in China that space counts. But space counts only when 
there is a determination to take advantage of it and resist, and 
not to collapse and submit. Apparently well-founded reports 
stated that the Allied armed forces would probably withdraw to 
inner lines of defence, leaving wide areas open to enemy occupa- 
tion, though probably the enemy, as in China, might not actually 
occupy them all. So questions arose as to how we should meet 
this situation both in these areas as well as in other areas where 
the civil administration might cease to function. We tried, as 
far as we could, to prepare mentally and otherwise for such crises 
by encouraging local organizations which could function and 
keep order, and at the same time by insisting that the invader had 
to be resisted at any cost. 

Why had the Chinese fought so stoutly for many years? Why, 
above all others, had the Russians and other peoples of the Soviet 
Union fought with such courage, tenacity, and whole-hearted- 
ness? Elsewhere people fought bravely also because they were 
moved by love of country, fear of aggression, and desire to pre- 
serve their ways of life. And yet there appeared to be a difference 
in the whole-heartedness of the war effort between Russia and 
other countries. Others had fought magnificently as at the time 

•470 



of Dunkirk and after, but there had been some moral slackening 
of effort when the immediate crisis was past; it seemed as if there 
were some doubts about the future, though the war had anyhow 
to be won. In the Soviet Union, so far as one could judge from 
the material available, there seemed to be no doubt or debate 
(though it was true that debate was not encouraged), and there 
was a supreme confidence in both the present and the future. 

In India? There was a deep-seated dislike of the present and 
the future seemed equally dark. No patriotic urge to action 
moved the people, only a desire to defend themselves against 
invasion and a worse fate. A few were moved by international 
considerations. Mixed up with all these feelings was resentment 
at being ordered about, suppressed and exploited by an alien and 
imperialist power. There was a fundamental wrongness in a 
system under which everything depended on the wishes and 
whims of an autocrat. Freedom is dear to all, but most ofall 
to those who have been deprived of it, or those who are in danger 
of losing it. Freedom in the modern world is conditioned and 
limited in many ways but those who do not possess it, do not 
realize these limitations, and idealize the conception till it be- 
comes a passionate craving and an overwhelming and consuming 
desire. If anything does not fit in with this longing or seems to go 
counter to it, that thing must inevitably suffer. The desire for 
freedom, for which so many in India had laboured and suffered, 
had not only received a check but it seemed that the prospect of 
it had receded into some dim and distant future. Instead of tack- 
ing that passion on to the world struggle that was going on, and 
drawing upon the vast reservoir of energy in the cause of Indian 
and world freedom and for India's defence, the war had been 
isolated from it, and no hope was centred in its issue. It is never 
wise to leave any people, even enemies, without hope. 

There were some of course in India who looked upon the war 
as something far bigger and vaster than the petty ambitions of 
the statesmen of the various countries involved in it; some who 
felt its revolutionary significance in their bones and realized that 
its ultimate issue and the consequences that would flow from 
it would take the world far beyond military victories and the pacts 
and utterances of politicians. But the number of these people was 
inevitably limited and the great majority, as in other countries, 
took a narrower view, which they called realistic, and were govern- 
ed by the considerations of the moment. Some, inclined to op- 
portunism, adapted themselves to British policy and fitted them- 
selves into it, as they would have collaborated with any other 
authority and policy. Some reacted strongly against this policy 
and felt that a submission to it was a betrayal not only of India's 
cause, but the world's cause. Most people became just passive, 
static, quiescent: the old failing of the Indian people against 

•471 



which we had struggled for so long. 

While this struggle was going on in India's mind and a feel- 
ing of desperation was growing, Gandhiji wrote a number of 
articles which suddenly gave a new direction to people's thoughts, 
or, as often happens, gave shape to their vague ideas. Inaction 
at that critical stage and submission to all that was happening 
had become intolerable to him. The only way to meet that situation 
was for Indian freedom to be recognized and for a free India to 
meet aggression and invasion in co-operation with the allied 
nations. If this recognition was not forthcoming then some action 
must be taken to challenge the existing system and wake up the 
people from the lethargy that was paralysing them and making 
them easy prey to every kind of aggression. 

There was nothing new in this demand, for it was a repeti- 
tion of what we had been saying all along, but there was a new 
urgency and passion in his speech and writing. And there was 
the hint of action. There was no doubt that he represented at the 
moment the prevailing sentiment in India. In a conflict between 
the two, nationalism had triumphed over internationalism, and 
Gandhiji's new writings created a stir all over India. And yet 
that nationalism was at no time opposed to internationalism and 
indeed was trying its utmost to find some opening to fit in with that 
larger aspect, if only it could be given an opportunity to do so 
honourably and effectively. There was no necessary conflict 
between the two for, unlike the aggressive nationalisms, of Europe, 
it did not seek to interfere with others but rather to co-operate 
with them to their common advantage. National freedom was 
seen as the essential basis of true internationalism and hence as 
the road to the latter, as well as the real foundation for co-operation 
in the common struggle against fascism and nazism. Meanwhile 
that internationalism, which was being so much talked about, 
was beginning to look suspiciously like the old policy of the 
imperialist powers, in a new, and yet not so new, attire; indeed it 
was itself an aggressive nationalism which, in the name of empire or 
commonwealth or mandatory, sought to impose its will on others. 

Some of us were disturbed and upset by this new develop- 
ment, for action was futile unless it was effective action, and 
any such effective action must necessarily come in the way of 
the war effort at a time when India herself stood in peril of 
invasion. Gandhiji's general approach also seemed to ignore 
important international considerations and appeared to be based 
on a narrow view of nationalism. During the three years of war 
we had deliberately followed a policy of non-embarrassment, 
and such action as we had indulged in had been in the nature 
of symbolic protest. That symbolic protest had assumed huge 
dimensions when 30,000 of our leading men and women were 
sent to prison in 1940-41. And yet even the prison-going was a 

•472 



selected individual affair and avoided any mass upheaval or any 
direct interference with the governmental apparatus. We could 
not repeat that, and if we did something else it had to be of 
a different kind and on a more effective scale. Was this not 
bound to interfere with the war on India's borders and encour- 
age the enemy? 

These were obvious difficulties and we discussed them at 
length with Gandhiji without converting each other. The diffi- 
culties were there and risks and perils seemed to follow any course 
of action or inaction. It became a question of balancing them 
and choosing the lesser evil. Our mutual discussion led to a 
clarification of much that had been vague and cloudy, and to 
Gandhiji's appreciation of many international factors to which 
his attention was drawn. His subsequent writing underwent a 
change and he himself emphasized these international considera- 
tions and looked at India's problem in a wider perspective. But 
his fundamental attitude remained: his objection to a passive 
submission to British autocratic and repressive policy in India 
and his intense desire to do something to challenge this. Sub- 
mission, according to him, meant that India would be broken in 
spirit and, whatever shape the war might take, whatever its end 
might be, her people would act in a servile way and their freedom 
would not be achieved for a long time. It would mean also 
submission to an invader and not continuing resistance to him 
regardless even of temporary military defeat or withdrawal. It 
would mean the complete demoralization ofour people and their 
losing all the strength that they had built up during a quarter of a 
century's unceasing struggle for freedom. It would mean that the 
world would forget India's demand for freedom and the post-war 
settlement would be governed by the old imperialist urges and ambi- 
tions. Passionately desirous of India's freedom as he was, India 
was to him something more than his loved homeland; it was the 
symbol of all the colonial and exploited peoples of the world, the 
acid test whereby any world policy must be judged. If India 
remained unfree then also the other colonial countries and subject 
races would continue in their present enslaved condition and the 
war would have been fought in vain. It was essential to change the 
moral basis of the war. The armies and the navies and air forces 
would function in their respective spheres and they might win 
by superior methods of violence, but to what end was their 
victory? And even armed warfare requires the support of morale; 
had not Napoleon said that in war 'the moral is to the physical 
as three to one?' The moral factor of hundreds of millions of 
subject and exploited people all over the world realizing and 
believing that this war was really for their freedom was of 
immense importance even from the narrower viewpoint of the 
war, and much more so for the peace to come. The very fact 



•473 



that a crisis had risen in the fortunes of the war necessitated a 
change in outlook and policy and the conversion of these sullen 
and doubting millions into enthusiastic supporters. If this mira- 
cle could take place all the military might of the axis powers 
would be of little avail and their collapse was assured. Many of 
the peoples of the axis countries might themselves be affected by 
this powerful world sentiment. 

In India it was better to convert the sullen passivity of the 
people into a spirit of non-submission and resistance. Though 
that non-submission would be, to begin with, to arbitrary orders 
of the British authorities, it could be turned into resistance to an 
invader. Submissiveness and servility to one would lead to the 
same attitude towards the other and thus to humiliation and 
degradation. 

We were familiar with all these arguments; we believed them 
and had ourselves used them frequently. But the tragedy was 
that the policy of the British Government prevented that miracle 
from taking place; all our attempts to solve the Indian problem, 
even temporarily, during the course of the war had failed, and 
all our requests for a declaration of war aims had been turned 
down. It was certain that a further attempt of this kind would 
also fail. What then? If it was to be conflict, however much it 
might be justified on moral or other grounds, there could be no 
doubt that it would tend to interfere greatly with the war effort 
in India at a time when the danger of invasion was considerable. 
There was no getting away from that fact. And yet, oddly 
enough, it was that very danger that had brought this crisis in 
our minds, for we could not remain idle spectators of it and see 
our country mismanaged and ruined by people whom we consi- 
dered incompetent and wholly incapable of shouldering the 
burden of a people's resistance which the occasion demanded. 
All our pent-up passion and energy sought some outlet, some 
way of action. 

Gandhiji was getting on in years, he was in the seventies, and 
a long life of ceaseless activity, of hard toil, both physical and 
mental, had enfeebled his body; but he was still vigorous enough, 
and he felt that all his life work would be in vain if he submitted 
to circumstances then and took no action to vindicate what he 
prized most. His love of freedom for India and all other exploited 
nations and peoples overcame even his strong adherence to 
non-violence. He had previously given a grudging and rather 
reluctant consent to the Congress not adhering to this policy in 
regard to defence and the state's functions in an emergency, but 
he had kept himself aloof from this. He realized that his half- 
hearted attitude in this matter might well come in the way of a 
settlement with Britain and the United Nations. So he went 
further and himself sponsored a Congress resolution which 

•474 



declared that the primary function of the provisional govern- 
ment of free India would be to throw all her great resources in 
the struggle for freedom and against aggression, and to co-operate 
fully with the United Nations in the defence of India with all the 
armed as well as other forces at her command. It was no easy 
matter for him to commit himself in this way, but he swallowed 
the bitter pill, so overpowering was his desire that some settle- 
ment should be arrived at to enable India to resist the aggressor 
as a free nation. 

Many of the theoretical and other differences that had often 
separated some of us from Gandhiji disappeared, but still that 
major difficulty remained — any action on our part must interfere 
with the war effort. Gandhiji, to our surprise, still clung to the 
belief that a settlement with the British Government was possible, 
and he said he would try his utmost to achieve it. And so, though 
he talked a great deal about action, he did not define it or indi- 
cate what he intended to do. 

While we were doubting and debating, the mood of the country 
changed, and from a sullen passivity it rose to a pitch of excite- 
ment and expectation. Events were not waiting for a Congress 
decision or resolution; they had been pushed forward by Gandhiji's 
utterances, and now they were moving onwards with their own 
momentum. It was clear that, whether Gandhiji was right or 
wrong, he had crystallized the prevailing mood of the people. 
There was a desperateness in it, an emotional urge which gave 
second place to logic and reason and a calm consideration of the 
consequences of action. Those consequences were not ignored, 
and it was realized that whether anything was achieved or not the 
price paid in human suffering would be heavy. But the price 
that was being paid from day to day in torture of the mind was 
also heavy and there was no prospect of escape from it. It was 
better to jump into the uncharted seas of action and do something, 
rather than be the tame objects of a malign fate. It was not a 
politician's approach but that of a people grown desperate and 
reckless of consequences; yet there was always an appeal to reason, 
an attempt to rationalize conflicting emotions, to find some 
consistency in the fundamental inconsistencies of human character. 
The war was going to be a long one, to last many more years; 
there had been many disasters and there were likely to be more, 
but the' war would continue in spite of them till it had tamed 
and exhausted the passions which gave rise to it and which it had 
itself encouraged. This time there would be no half-success which 
are often more painful than failures. It had taken a wrong turn 
not only in the field of military action but even more so in regard 
to the more fundamental objectives for which it was supposed to 
be fought. Perhaps such action as we might indulge in might draw 
forcible attention to this latter failure and help to give a new and 

•475 



more promising turn. And even if present success was lacking it 
might serve that saving purpose in the longer run, and thus help 
also in giving powerful support in the future to military action. 

If the temper of the people rose, so also did the temper of the 
Government. No emotional or other urge was required for this, 
for it was its natural temper and its normal way of functioning 
— the way of an alien authority in occupation of a subject country. 
It seemed to welcome this opportunity of crushing once for all, 
as it thought, all the elements in the country which dared to 
oppose its will; and for this it prepared accordingly. 

Events marched ahead, and yet, curiously, Gandhiji, who had 
said so much about action to protect the honour of India and 
affirm her right to freedom, and as a free nation to co-operate 
fully in the fight against aggression, said nothing at all about 
the nature of this action. Peaceful, of course, it had necessarily 
to be, but what more ? He began to lay greater stress on the possi- 
bilities of an agreement with the British Government, of his 
intention to approach it again and try his utmost to find a way 
out. His final speech at the All-India Congress Committee express- 
ed his earnest desire for a settlement and his determination to 
approach the Viceroy for this. Neither in public nor in private 
at the meetings of the Congress Working Committee did he hint 
at the nature of the action he had in mind, except in one particular. 
He had suggested privately that in the event of failure of all 
negotiations he would appeal for some kind of non-co-operation 
and a one-day protest hartal, or cessation of all work in the country, 
something in the nature of a one-day general strike, symbolic of 
a nation's protest. Even this was a vague suggestion which he did 
not particularize, for he did not want to make any further plans 
till he had made his attempt at a settlement. So neither he nor the 
Congress Working Committee issued any kind of directions, public 
or private, except that people should be prepared for all develop- 
ments, and should in any event adhere to the policy of peaceful 
and non-violent action. 

Though Gandhiji was still hopeful of finding some way out 
of the impasse, very few persons shared his hope. The course of 
events and all the development that had taken place pointed 
inevitably to a conflict, and when that stage is reached middle 
positions cease to have importance and each individual has to 
choose on which side he will range himself. For Congressmen, 
as for others who felt that way, there was no question of choice; 
it was inconceivable that the whole might of a powerful govern- 
ment should try to crush our people and that any of us should 
stand by and be passive spectators of a struggle in which India's 
freedom was involved. Many people of course do stand by in 
spite of their sympathies, but any such attempt to save himself 
from the consequences of his own previous acts would have been 

•476 



shameful and dishonourable for prominent Congressmen. But 
even apart from this there was no choice left far them. The 
whole of India's past history pursued them, as well as the agony 
of the present and the hope of the future, and all these drove 
them forward and conditioned their actions. 'The piling up of 
the past upon the past goes on without relaxation,' says Bergson 
in his 'Creative Evolution.' 'In reality the past is preserved by 
itself, automatically. In its entirety, probably, it follows us at 

every instant Doubtless we think with only a small part of 

our past, but it is with our entire past, including the original 
bent of our soul, that we desire, will and act.' 

On August 7th and 8th, in Bombay the All-India Congress 
Committee considered and debated in public the resolution, 
which has since come to be known as the 'Quit India Resolution.' 
That resolution was a long and comprehensive one, a reasoned 
argument for the immediate recognition of Indian freedom and 
the ending of British rule in India 'both for the sake of India and 
for the success of the cause of the United Nations. The continua- 
tion of that rule is degrading and enfeebling India and making 
her progressively less capable of defending herself and of contri- 
buting to the cause of world freedom.' 'The possession of empire, 
instead of adding to the strength of the ruling power, has become 
a burden and a curse. India, the classic land of modern imperia- 
lism, has become the crux of the question, for by the freedom of 
India will Britain and the United Nations be judged, and the 
peoples of Asia and Africa be filled with hope and enthusiasm.' 
The resolution went on to suggest the formation of a provisional 
government, which would be composite and would represent all 
important sections of the people and whose 'primary function 
must be to defend India and resist aggression with all the armed 
as well as the non-violent forces at its command, together with its 
allied powers.' This government would evolve a scheme for a consti- 
tuent assembly which would prepare a constitution for India 
acceptable to all sections of the people. The constitution would 
be a federal one, with the largest measure of autonomy for the 
federating units and with the residuary powers vesting in those 
units. 'Freedom will enable India to resist aggression effectively 
with the people's united will and strength behind it.' 

This freedom of India must be the symbol of the prelude to 
the freedom of all other Asiatic nations. Further, a world federa- 
tion of free nations was proposed, of which a beginning should 
be made with United Nations. 

The Committee stated that it was 'anxious not to embarrass 
in any way the defence of China and Russia, whose freedom is 
precious and must be preserved, or to jeopardize the defensive 
capacity of the United Nations.' (At that time the dangers to 
China and Russia were the greatest.) 'But the peril grows both 

•477 



to India and these nations, and inaction and submission to a 
foreign administration at this stage is not only degrading India 
and reducing her capacity to defend herself and resist aggression 
but is no answer to that growing peril and is no service to the 
peoples of the United Nations.' 

The Committee again appealed to Britain and the United 
Nations 'in the interest of world freedom.' But — and there came 
the sting of the resolution — 'the Committee is no longer justified 
in holding the nation back from endeavouring to assert its will 
against an imperialist and authoritarian Government which 
dominates over it and prevents it from functioning in its own 
interest and in the interest of humanity. The Committee resolves 
therefore to sanction, for the vindication of India's inalienable 
right to freedom and independence, the starting of a mass 
struggle on non-violent lines under the inevitable leadership of 
Gandhiji.' That sanction was to take effect only when Gandhiji 
so decided. Finally, it was stated that the Committee had 'no 
intention of gaining power for the Congress. The power, when 
it comes, will belong to the whole people of India.' 

In their concluding speeches Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the 
Congress president, and Gandhiji made it clear that their next 
steps would be to approach the Viceroy, as representing the 
British Government, and to appeal to the heads of the principal 
United Nations for an honourable settlement, which, while recog- 
nizing the freedom of India, would also advance the cause of the 
United Nations in the struggle against the aggressor Axis powers. 

The resolution was finally passed late in the evening of August 
8th, 1942. A few hours later, in the early morning of August 
9th, a large number of arrests were made in Bombay and all over 
the country. And so to Ahmadnagar Fort. 



•478 



CHAPTER TEN 



AHMADNAGAR FORT AGAIN 
The Chain of Happening 



AHMADNAGAR FORT. AUGUST THIRTEENTH, NINETEEN FORTY-FOUR. 

It is just over two years since we came here, two years of a dream 
life rooted in one spot, with the same few individuals to see, the 
same limited environment, the same routine from day to day. 
Sometime in the future we shall wake up from this dream and 
go out into the wider world of life and activity, finding it a chang- 
ed world. There will be an air of unfamiliarity about the persons 
and things we see; we shall remember them again and past 
memories will crowd into our minds, and yet they will not be the 
same, nor will we be the same, and we may find it difficult to fit 
in with them. Sometimes we may wonder whether this renewed 
experience of everyday living is not itself a sleep and a dream from 
which we may suddenly wake up. Which is the dream and which 
is the waking ? Are they both real, for we experience and feel them 
in all their intensity, or are they both unsubstantial and of the 
nature of fleeting dreams which pass, leaving vague memories 
behind? 

Prison and its attendant solitude and passivity lead to thought 
and an attempt to fill the vacuum of life with memories of past 
living, of one's own life, and of the long chain of history of hu- 
man activity. So during the past four months, in the course of this 
writing, I have occupied my mind with India's past records and 
experiences, and out of the multitude of ideas that came to me 
I have selected some and made a book out of them. Looking back 
at what I have written, it seems inadequate, disjointed and lacking 
in unity, a mixture of many things, with the personal element 
dominant and giving its colour even to what was intended to be 
an objective record and analysis. That personal element has 
pushed itself forward almost against my will; often I checked it 
and held it back but sometimes I loosened the reins and allowed 
it to flow out of my pen, and mirror, to some extent, my mind. 

By writing of the past I have tried to rid myself of the burden 
of the past. But the present remains with all its complexity and 
irrationality and the dark future that lies beyond, and the burden 
of these is no less than that of the past. The vagrant mind, finding 

•479 



no haven, still wanders about restlessly, bringing discomfort to 
its possessor as well as to others. There is some envy for those 
virgin minds which have not been soiled or violated by thought's 
assault, and on which doubt has cast no shadow nor written a line. 
How easy is life for them in spite of its occasional shock and pain. 
Events take place one after the other and the uninterrupted 
and unending stream of happenings goes on. We seek to under- 
stand a particular event by isolating it and looking at it by itself, 
as if it were the beginning and the end, the resultant of some 
cause immediately preceding it. Yet it has no beginning and is 
but a link in an unending chain, caused by all that has preceded 
it, and resulting from the wills, urges, and desires of innumerable 
human beings coalescing and conflicting with each other, and 
producing something different from that which any single indi- 
vidual intended to happen. Those wills, urges, and desires are 
themselves largely conditioned by previous events and experiences, 
and the new event in its turn becomes another conditioning factor 
for the future. The man of destiny, the leader who influences the 
multitude, undoubtedly plays an important part in this process, 
and yet he himself is the product of past events and forces and his 
influence is conditioned by them. 

The Two Backgrounds: Indian and British 

What happened in India in August, 1942, was no sudden deve- 
lopment but a culmination of all that had gone before. Much 
has been written about it, in attack, criticism or defence, and 
many explanations given. And yet most of this writing misses 
the real meaning, for it applies purely political considerations 
to something that was deeper than politics. Behind it all lay an 
intense feeling that it was no longer possible to endure and live 
under foreign autocratic rule. All other questions became secon- 
dary — whether under that rule it was possible to make improve- 
ments or progress in some directions, or whether the consequences 
of a challenge might be more harmful still. Only the overwhelm- 
ing desire to be rid of it and to pay any price for the riddance 
remained, only the feeling that whatever happened this could 
not be endured. 

That feeling was no new sensation; it had been there for many 
years. But previously it had been restrained in many ways and 
disciplined to keep pace with events. The war itself was both a 
restraining and releasing factor. It opened out our minds to vast 
developments and revolutionary changes, to the possibility of 
the realization of our hopes in the near future; and it put a brake 
on much that we might otherwise have done because of our desire 
to help, and certainly not to hinder in any way, the struggle 
against the Axis powers. 

•480 



But, as the war developed, it became ever clearer that the 
western democracies were fighting not for a change but for a 
perpetuation of the old order. Before the war they had appeased 
fascism, not only because of the fear of its consequences but also 
because of a certain ideological sympathy with it and an extreme 
dislike of some of the probable alternatives to it. Nazism and 
fascism were no sudden growths or accidents of history. They 
were the natural developments of the past course of events, of 
empire and racial discrimination, of national struggles, of the 
growing concentration of power, of technological growth which 
found no scope for its fulfilment within the existing framework 
of society, of the inherent conflict between the democratic ideal 
and a social structure opposed to it. Political democracy in wes- 
tern Europe and North America, opening the door to national 
and individual progress, had also released new forces and ideas, 
aiming inevitably at economic equality. Conflict was inherent 
in the situation; there would either be an enlargement of that 
political democracy or attempts to curb it and end it. Democracy 
grew in content and area, in spite of constant opposition, and 
became the accepted ideal of political organization. But a time 
came when a further expansion endangered the basis of the social 
structure, and then the upholders of that structure became cla- 
mant and aggressive and organized themselves to oppose change. 
In countries so circumstanced that the crisis developed more 
rapidly, democracy was openly and deliberately crushed and 
fascism and nazism appeared. In the democracies of western 
Europe and North America the same processes were at play 
though many other factors delayed the crisis and probably the 
much longer tradition of peaceful and democratic government 
also helped. Behind some of these democracies lay empires where 
there was no democracy at all and where the same kind of 
authoritarianism which is associated with fascism prevailed. 
There also, as in fascist countries, the governing class allied itself 
to reactionary and opportunist groups and feudal survivals in 
order to suppress the demand for freedom. And there also they 
began to assert that democracy, though good as an ideal and 
desirable in their own home lands, was not suited to the peculiar 
conditions prevailing in their colonial domains. So it was a natural 
consequence for these western democracies to feel some kind of 
an ideological bond with fascism, even when they disliked many 
of its more brutal and vulgar manifestations. 

When they were forced to fight in self-defence, they looked 
forward to a restoration of that very structure which had failed 
so dismally. The war was looked upon and presented as a defen- 
sive war, and this was true enough in a way. But there was another 
aspect of the war, a moral aspect which went beyond military 

•481 



objectives and attacked aggressively the fascist creed and outlook. 
For it was a war, as has been said, for the soul of the peoples of the 
world. In it lay the seeds of change not only for the fascist coun- 
tries but also for the United Nations. This moral aspect of the war 
was obscured by powerful propaganda, and emphasis was laid 
on defence and perpetuation of the past and not on creating a 
new future. There were many people in the west who ardently 
believed in this moral aspect and wanted to create a new world 
which would afford some guarantees against that utter failure of 
human society which the World War represented. There were 
vast numbers of people everywhere, including especially the men 
who fought and died on the field of battle, who vaguely but firmly 
hoped for this change. And there were those hundreds of millions 
of the dispossessed and exploited and racially discriminated 
against in Europe and America, and much more so in Asia and 
Africa, who could not isolate the war from their memories of the 
past and their present misery, and passionately hoped, even when 
hope was unreasonable, that the war would somehow lift the 
burdens that crushed them. 

But the eyes of the leaders of the United Nations were turned 
elsewhere; they looked back to the past and not forward to the 
future. Sometimes they spoke eloquently of the future to appease 
the hunger of their people, but their policy had little to do with 
these fine phrases. For Mr. Winston Churchill it was a war of 
restoration and nothing more, a continuation, with minor changes, 
of both the social structure of England and the imperial structure 
of her empire. President Roosevelt spoke in terms of greater pro- 
mise, but his policy had not been radically different. Still many 
people all over the world looked to him with hope as a man of 
vision and high statesmanship. 

So the future for India and the rest of the world, in so far as 
the British ruling class could help it, would be in line with the 
past, and the present had necessarily to conform to it. In that 
very present the seeds of this future were being sown. The Cripps 
proposals, for all their seeming advance, created new and danger- 
ous problems for us, which threatened to become insuperable 
barriers to freedom. To some extent they have already had this 
result. The all-pervading autocracy and authoritarianism of 
the British Government in India, and the widespread suppression 
of the most ordinary civil rights and liberties, had reached their 
further limits during, and under cover of, the war. No one in the 
present generation had experienced the like of these. They were 
constant reminders of our enslaved condition and continuing 
humiliation. They were also a presage of the future, of the shape 
of things to come, for out of this present, the future would grow. 
Anything seemed to be better than to submit to this degradation. 

•482 



How many people out of India's millions felt this way is im- 
possible to say. For most of those millions all conscious feeling 
has been deadened by poverty and misery. Among the others were 
those who had been corrupted by office or privilege or vested 
interest, or whose minds had been diverted by special claims. Yet 
the feeling was very widespread, varying in intensity and some- 
times overlaid by other feelings. There were many gradations in 
it, from an intensity of belief and a desire to brave all hazards, 
which led inevitably to action, to a vague sympathy from a safe 
distance. Some, tragically inclined, felt suffocated and strangled 
at the lack of air to breathe in the oppressive atmosphere that 
surrounded them; others, living on the ordinary trivial plane, 
had more capacity to adapt themselves to conditions they disliked. 

The background of the British governing personnel in India 

was entirely different. Indeed nothing is more striking than the 
vast gulf that separates the mind of the British and the Indians 
and, whoever may be right or wrong, this very fact demonstrates 
the utter incapacity of the British to function as a ruling class in 
India. For there must be some harmony, some common outlook, 
between the rulers and the ruled if there is to be any advance; 
otherwise there can only be conflict, actual or potential. The 
British in India have always represented the most conservative 
elements of Britain; between them and the liberal tradition in 
England there is little in common. The more years they spend 
in India, the more rigid they grow in outlook, and when they 
retire and go back to England, they become the experts who 
advise on Indian problems. They are convinced of their own 
rectitude, of the benefits and necessity of British rule in India, 
of their own high mission in being -the representatives of the 
imperial tradition. Because the national Congress has challenged 
the whole basis of this rule and sought to rid India of it, it has 
become, in their eyes, Public Enemy No. 1. Sir Reginald Max- 
well, the then Home Member of the Government of India, speak- 
ing in the Central Assemby in 1941, gave a revealing glimpse of 
his mind. He was defending himself against the charge that 
Congressmen and socialists and communists, detained without 
trial in prison, were subjected to inhuman treatment, far worse 
than that given to German and Italian prisoners of war. He said 
that Germans and Italians were, at any rate, fighting for their 
countries, but these others were enemies of society who wanted 
to subvert the existing order. Evidently, it seemed to him prepos- 
terous that an Indian should want freedom for his country or 
should want to change the economic structure of India. As 
between the two his sympathies were obviously for the Germans 
and Italians, though his own country was engaged in a bitter war 
against them. This was before Russia entered the war and it was 

•483 



safe then to condemn every attempt to change the social order. 
Before World War II began, admiration for the fascist regimes 
was frequently expressed. Had not Hitler himself said, in his 'Mein 
Kampf and subsequently, that he wanted the British Empire to 
continue ? 

The Government of India certainly was anxious to help in 
every way in the war against the Axis powers. But in its mind that 
victory would be incomplete if it was not accompanied by another 
victory — the crushing of the nationalist movements in India as 
represented mainly by the Congress. The Cripps negotiations 
had perturbed it and it rejoiced at their failure. The way was 
now open to deal the final blow at the Congress and all those who 
sided with it. The moment was favourable, for at no previous 
time had there been such concentration of unlimited power, 
both at the centre and in the provinces, in the hands of the Viceroy 
and his principal subordinates. The war situation was a difficult 
one and it was a feasible argument that no opposition or trouble 
could be tolerated. Liberal elements in England and America, 
interested in India, had been quietened by the Cripps affair and 
the propaganda that followed. In England the ever-present feeling 
of self-righteousness in relation to India had grown. Indians, or 
many of them, it was felt there, were intransigent, troublesome 
persons, narrow in outlook, unable to appreciate the dangers of 
the situation, and probably in sympathy with the Japanese. Mr. 
Gandhi's articles and statements, it was said, had proved how 
impossible he was and the only way left open was to put an end 
to all this by crushing Gandhi and the Congress once for all. 



Mass Upheavals and their Suppression 

In the early morning of August 9th, 1942, numerous arrests were 
made all over India. What happened then? Only scraps of news 
trickled through to us after many weeks, and even now we can 
form only an incomplete picture of what took place. All the promi- 
nent leaders had been suddenly removed and no one seemed to 
know what should be done. Protests, of course, there had to be, 
and there were spontaneous demonstrations. These were broken 
up and fired upon, and tear-gas bombs were used; all the usual 
channels of giving expression to public feeling were stopped. 
And then all these suppressed emotions broke out and crowds 
gathered in cities and rural areas and came in conflict with the 
police and the military. They attacked especially what seemed to 
them the symbols of British authority and power, the police 
stations, post offices, and railway stations; they cut the telegraph 
and telephone wires. These unarmed and leaderless mobs faced 
police and military firing, according to official statements, on 

•484 



538 occasions, and they were also machine-gunned from low- 
flying aircraft. For a month or two or more these disturbances 
continued in various parts of the country and then they dwindled 
away and gave place to sporadic occurrences. 'The disturbances,' 
said Mr. Churchill in the House of Commons, 'were crushed with 
all the weight of the Government,' and he praised 'the loyalty 
and steadfastness of the brave Indian police as well as the Indian 
official class generally whose behaviour has been deserving of the 
highest praise.' He added that 'larger reinforcements have reached 
India and the number of white troops in that country is larger 
than at any time in the British connection.' These foreign troops 
and the Indian police had won many a battle against the un- 
armed peasantry of India and crushed their rebellion; and that 
other main prop of the British Raj in India, the official class, had 
helped, actively or passively, in the process. 

This reaction in the country was extraordinarily widespread, 
both in towns and villages. In almost all the provinces and in a 
large number of the Indian states there were innumerable 
demonstrations, in spite of official prohibition. There were hartals, 
closure of shops and markets and a stoppage of business every- 
where, varying in duration from a number of days to some weeks 
and, in a few cases, to over a month. So also labour strikes. More 
organized and used to disciplined group action, industrial workers 
in many important centres spontaneously declared strikes in 
protest against Government action in arresting national leaders. 
A notable instance of this was at the vital steel city of Jamshed- 
pur where the skilled workers, drawn from all over India, kept 
away from work for a fortnight and only agreed to return on the 
management promising that they would try their best to get the 
Congress leaders released and a national government formed. 
In the great textile centre of Ahmedabad also there was a sudden 
and complete stoppage of work in all the numerous factories 
without any special call from the trade union.* This general strike 
in Ahmedabad continued peacefully for over three months in 

* // has been stated by high Government officials, and frequently repeated by others, that these 
strikes, especially in Jamshedpur and Ahmedabad, were encouraged by the employers and 
millowners. This is hardly credible for the strikes involved the employers in very heavy losses, 
and I have yet to know big industrialists who work against their own interests in this manner. 
It is true that many industrialists sympathise with and desire India's independence, but their 
conception of India's freedom is necessarily one in which they have a secure place. They 
dislike revolutionary action and any vital change in the social structure. It is possible, how- 
ever, that influenced by the depth and widespread character of public feeling in August and 
September, 1942, they refrained from adopting that aggressive and punitive attitude, in 
co-operation with the police, which they usually indulge in when strikes take place. 

Another frequent assertion, almost taken for granted in British circles and the British press, 
is that the Indian Congress is heavily financed by the big industrialists. This is wholly 
untrue, and I ought to know something about it as I have been general secretary and president 
of the Congress for many years. A few industrialists have financially helpedfrom time to time 
in the social reform activities of Gandhiji and the Congress, such as, village industries, 

•485 



spite of all attempts to break it. It was a purely political and 
spontaneous reaction of the workers, and they suffered greatly, 
for it was a time of relatively high wages. They received no finan- 
cial help whatever from outside during this long period. At other 
centres the strikes were of briefer duration, lasting sometimes only 
for a few days. Cawnpore, another big textile centre, had, so far 
as I know, no major strike, chiefly because the communist leader- 
ship there succeeded in averting it. In the railways also, which are 
Government-owned, there was no marked or general stoppage 
of work, except such as was caused by the disturbances, and this 
latter was considerable. 

Among the provinces, the Punjab was probably the least affect- 
ed, but there were many hartals and strikes even there. The 
North-West Frontier Province, almost exclusively Moslem in 
population, occupied a peculiar position. To begin with, there 
were no mass arrests or other provocative action there on the 
part of the Government, as in the other provinces. This may 
have been partly due to the fact that the frontier people were 
considered inflammable material, but also partly to the policy 
of Government to show that Moslems were keeping apart from 
the nationalist upheaval. But when news of happenings in the rest 
of India reached the Frontier Province there were numerous 
demonstrations and even aggressive challenges to British author- 
ity. There was firing on the demonstrators and the usual methods 
of suppressing popular activities were adopted. Several thousands 
of people were arrested, and even the great Pathan leader Bad- 
shah Khan (as Abdul Ghaffar Khan is popularly known) was 
seriously injured by police blows. This was extreme provocation 
and yet, surprisingly enough, the excellent discipline, which 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan had established among his people, held, 
and there were no violent disturbances there of the kind that 
occurred in many parts of the country. 

The sudden, unorganized demonstrations and outbreaks on 
the part of the people, culminating in violent conflicts and 
destruction, and continued against overwhelming and powerful 

abolition of untouchability and raising of depressed classes, basic education, etc. But they 
have kept scrupulously aloof from the political work of the Congress, even in normal times, 
and much more so during periods of conflict with government. Whatever their occasional 
sympathies, they believe, like most sober and well-established individuals, in safety first. 
Congress work has been carried on almost entirely on the petty subscriptions and donations of 
its large membership. Most of the work has been voluntary and unpaid. Occasionally, in the 
cities, the merchants have helped a little. The only exception to this was probably during the 
general elections of 1937 when some big industrialists contributed to the central election fund. 
Even this fund, considering the scope of our activity, was inconsiderable. It is astonishing, 
and it will be incredible to westerners, with what little money we have carried on our work in 
the Congress during the last quarter of a century — a period when India has been convulsed 
repeatedly by political activity and direct action movements. In the United Provinces, one 
of our most active and well-organized provinces, and one with which I am best acquainted, 
almost our entire work was based on the four anna subscriptions of our members. 

•486 



armed forces, were a measure of the intensity of their feelings. 
Those feelings had been there even before the arrest of their 
leaders, but the arrests, and the frequent firings that followed 
them, roused the people to anger and to the only course that an 
enraged mob can follow. For a time there seems to have been 
a sense of uncertainty as to what should be done. There was no 
direction, no programme. There was no well-known person to 
lead them or tell them what to do, and yet they were too excited 
and angry to remain quiescent. As often happens in these circums- 
tances, local leaders sprang up and were followed for the moment. 
But even the guidance they gave was little; it was essentially a 
spontaneous mass upheaval. All over India, the younger gene- 
ration, especially university students, played an important part 
in both the violent and peaceful activities of 1942. Many univer- 
sities were closed. Some of the local leaders attempted even then 
to pursue peaceful methods of action and civil disobedience, but 
this was difficult in the prevailing atmosphere. The people forgot 
the lesson of non-violence which had been dinned into their ears 
for more than twenty years, and yet they were wholly unprepared, 
mentally or otherwise, for any effective violence. That very teach- 
ing of non-violent methods produced doubt and hesitation and 
came in the way of violent action. If the Congress, forgetful of 
its creed, had previously given even a hint of violent action, there 
is no doubt that the violence that actually took place would have 
increased a hundred-fold. 

But no such hint had been given, and, indeed, the last message 
of the Congress had again emphasized the importance of non- 
violence in action. Yet perhaps one fact had some effect on the 
public mind. If, as we had said, armed defence was legitimate 
and desirable against an enemy aggressor, why should that not 
apply to other forms of existing aggression? The prohibition of 
violent methods of attack and defence once removed had un- 
intended results, and it was not easy for most people to draw 
fine distinctions. All over the world extreme forms of violence 
were prevailing and incessant propaganda encouraged them. It 
became then a question of expediency and of intensity of feeling. 
Then there were also people, outside or in the Congress, who 
never had any belief in non-violence and who were troubled with 
no scruples in regard to violent action. 

But in the excitement of the moment few people think; they 
act in accordance with their long-suppressed urges which drive 
them forward. And so, for the first time since the great revolt 
of 1857, vast numbers of people again rose to challenge by force 
(but a force without arms!) the fabric of British rule in India. 
It was a foolish and inopportune challenge, for all the organized 
and armed force was on the other side, and in greater measure 

•487 



indeed than at any previous time in history. However great the 
numbers of the crowd, it cannot prevail in a contest of force 
against armed forces. It had to fail unless those armed forces 
themselves changed their allegiance. But those crowds had not 
prepared for the contest or chosen the time for it. It came upon 
them unawares and in their immediate reaction to it, however 
unthinking and misdirected it was, they showed their love of 
India's freedom and their hatred of foreign domination. 

Though the policy of non-violence went under, for the time 
being at least, the long training that the people had received 
under it had one important and desirable result. In spite of the 
passions aroused there was very little, if any, racial feeling, and, 
on the whole, there was a deliberate attempt on the part of the 
people to avoid causing bodily injury to their opponents. There 
was a great deal of destruction of communications and govern- 
mental property, but even in the midst of this destruction care 
was taken to avoid loss of life. This was not always possible or 
always attempted, especially in actual conflicts with the police 
or other armed forces. According to official reports, so far as I 
have been able to find them, about 100 persons were killed by 
mobs in the course of the disturbances all over India. This figure 
is very small considering the extent and area of the disturbances 
and the conflicts with the police. One particularly brutal and 
distressing case was the murder of two Canadian airmen by a 
mob somewhere in Bihar. But, generally speaking, the absence 
of racial feeling was very remarkable.* 

Official estimates of the number of people killed and wound- 
ed by police or military firing in the 1942 disturbances are: 
1,028 killed and 3,200 wounded. These figures are certainly gross 
under-estimates for it has been officially stated that such firing 
took place on at least 538 occasions, and besides this people were 
frequently shot at by the police or the military from moving 
lorries. It is very difficult to arrive at even an approximately 
correct figure. Popular estimates place the number of deaths at 
25,000, but probably this is an exaggeration. Perhaps 10,000 may 
be nearer the mark. 

It was extraordinary how British authority ceased to function 

*A revealing incident is reported in 'British Soldier Looks at India, ' being letters ofClive 
Branson. Branson was an artist and a communist. He served in the International Brigade 
in Spain, and in 1941 joined the Royal Armoured Corps, in which he was a sergeant. He 
was sent to India with his regiment in 1942. In February, 1944, he was killed in action 
in Arakan in Burma. He was in Bombay in August, 1942, after the arrest of the Congress 
leaders, and at a time when the people of Bombay were seething with anger and passion and 
were being shot down. Branson is reported to have said: ' What a clean healthy nationalism 
you have! I asked people the way to the Communist Party's office. I was in uniform. Men 
like me were shooting unarmed Indians, and naturally I was a little worried. I wondered 
how I would be treated. But everyone whom I asked was anxious to help — not one tried 
to insult or mislead me. ' 

•488 



over many areas, both rural and urban, and it took many days, 
and sometimes weeks, for a 'reconquest', as it was often termed. 
This happened particularly in Bihar, in the Midnapur district 
of Bengal and in the south-eastern districts of the United Pro- 
vinces. It is note-worthy that in the district of Ballia in the United 
Provinces (which had to be 'reconquered') there have been no 
serious allegations of physical violence and injury to human 
beings caused by the crowds, so far as one can judge from the 
numerous subsequent trials by special tribunals. The ordinary 
police proved incapable of meeting the situation. Early in 1942, 
however, a new force called the Special Armed Constabulary 
(S.A.C.) had been created and this had been especially trained 
to deal with popular demonstrations and disturbances. This played 
an important part in curbing and suppressing the people and 
often functioned after the manner of the 'Black and Tarts' in 
Ireland. The Indian army was not often used in this connection, 
except for certain groups and classes in it. British soldiers were 
more often employed, and also the Gurkhas. Sometimes Indian 
soldiers as well as the special police were sent to distant parts of 
the country where they functioned more or less as strangers, being 
unacquainted with the language. 

If the reaction of the crowd was natural, so also, in the cir- 
cumstances, was the reaction of the government. It had to crush 
both the impromptu frenzy of the mob and the peaceful demon- 
strations of other people and, in the interests of its own self- 
preservation, attempt to destroy those whom it considered its 
enemies. If it had had the capacity or desire to understand and 
appreciate what moved the people so powerfully, the crisis would 
not have risen at all and India's problem would have been nearer 
solution. The government had prepared carefully to crush once 
for all, as it thought, any challenge to its authority; it had taken 
the initiative and chosen the time for its first blow; it had removed 
to its prisons thousands of men and women who had played a 
prominent part in the nationalist, the labour, and the peasant 
movements. Yet it was surprised and taken aback by the upheaval 
that suddenly convulsed the country and, momentarily, its wides- 
pread apparatus of repression was disjoined. But it had enormous 
resources at its command and it utilized them to crush both the 
violent and non-violent manifestations of the rebellion. Many 
of the upper and richer classes, timidly nationalist, and sometimes 
even critical of government, were frightened by this exhibition of 
mass action on an All-India scale, which cared little for vested 
interests and smelt not only of political revolution but also of social 
change. As the success of the government in crushing the rebellion 
became apparent, the waverers and the opportunists lined up with it 
and began to curse all those who had dared to challenge authority. 

The external evidences of rebellion having been crushed, its 

•489 



very roots had to be pulled out, and so the whole apparatus of 
government was turned in this direction in order to enforce 
complete submission to British domination. Laws could be pro- 
duced over-night by the Viceroy's decree or ordinance, but even 
the formalities of these laws were reduced to a minimum. The 
decisions of the Federal Court and the High Courts, which were 
creations and emblems of British authority, were flouted and 
ignored by the executive, or a new ordinance was issued to over- 
ride those decisions. Special tribunals (which were subsequently 
held by the courts to be illegal) were established, functioning 
without the trammels of the ordinary rules of procedure and 
evidence, and these sentenced thousands to long terms of impri- 
sonment and many even to death. The police (and especially the 
Special Armed Constabulary) and the secret service were all 
powerful and became the chief organs of the state, and could 
indulge in any illegalities or brutalities without criticism or 
hindrance. Corruption grew to giant proportions. Vast numbers 
of students in schools and colleges were punished in various ways 
and thousands of young men were flogged. Public activity of all 
kinds was prohibited unless it was in favour of the government. 

But the greatest sufferers were the simple-hearted, poverty- 
stricken villagers of the rural areas. Suffering, for many genera- 
tions, had been the badge of their tribe; they had ventuied to 
look up and hope, to dream of better times; they had even roused 
themselves to action; whether they had been foolish or mistaken 
or not, they had proved their loyalty to the cause of Indian free- 
dom. Their effort had failed, and the burden had fallen on their 
bent shoulders and broken bodies. Cases were reported of whole 
villages being sentenced from flogging to death. It was stated on 
behalf of the Bengal Government that 'Government forces burnt 
193 Congress camps and houses in the sub-divisions of Tamluk 
and Contai before and after the cyclone of 1942.' The cyclone 
had worked havoc in that area and created a wilderness but that 
made no difference to the official policy. 

Huge sums were imposed on villages as a whole as punitive 
fines. According to Mr. Amery's statement in the House of 
Commons, the total collective fines amounted to rupees ninety 
lakhs (9,000,000), and out of this Rs. 7,850,000 were realized. 
How these vast sums were realized from starving wretches is 
another matter, and nothing that took place in 1942 or after, not 
the shooting and the burning by the police, caused such an inten- 
sity of suffering as this forcible realization. Not merely were the 
fines imposed realized, but often much more, the excess vanish- 
ing in the process of realization. 

All the conventions and subterfuges that usually veil the acti- 
vities of governments were torn aside and only naked force re- 
mained as the symbol of power and authority. There was no 

•490 



further need for subterfuge for the British power had succeeded, 
at least for the time being, in crushing both the non-violent and 
violent attempts made to replace it by a national authority and 
stood supreme in India. India had failed in that final test when 
strength and power only count and all else is mere quibbling and 
irrelevance. She had failed not only because of British armed 
might and the confusion produced by the war situation in people's 
minds, but also because many of her own people were not pre- 
pared for that last sacrifice which freedom requires. So the British 
felt they had firmly re-established their rule in India and they 
saw no reason to loosen their hold again. 

Reactions Abroad 

A strict censorship cast a heavy veil over the happenings in India. 
Even newspapers in India were not permitted to give publicity 
to much that was daily taking place, and messages to foreign 
countries were subject to an ever stricter surveillance. At the 
same time official propaganda was let loose abroad and false and 
tendentious accounts were circulated. The United States of Ame- 
rica were especially flooded with this propaganda, for opinion 
there was held to count, and hundreds of lecturers and others, 
both English and Indian, were sent there to tour the country. 

Even apart from this propaganda, it was natural in England, 
suffering the strain and anxiety of war, for resentment to be felt 
against Indians and especially those who were adding to their 
troubles in time of crisis. One-sided propaganda added to this 
and, even more so, the conviction of the British in their own 
righteousness. Their very lack of awareness of others' feelings bad 
been their strength and it continued to justify actions taken on 
their behalf, and to cast the blame for any mishap on the iniquity 
of others who were so blind to the obvious virtues of the British. 
Those virtues had now been justified afresh by the success of 
British forces and the Indian police in crushing those in India 
who had ventured to doubt them. Empire had been justified and 
Mr. Winston Churchill declared, with special reference to India: 
T have not become the King's first minister in order to preside 
over the liquidation of the British Empire.' In saying so, Mr. 
Churchill undoubtedly represented the viewpoint of the vast 
majority of his people, and even of many who had previously 
criticized the theory and practice of imperialism. The leaders of 
the British Labour Party, anxious to demonstrate that they were 
behind no other group in their attachment to the imperial tradi- 
tion, supported Mr. Churchill's statement and 'stressed the resolve 
of the British people to keep the empire together after the war.' 

In America, opinion, in so far as it was interested in the far 
away problem of India, was divided, for people there were not 

•491 



equally convinced of the virtues of the British ruling class and 
looked with some disapproval on other peoples' empires. They 
were also anxious to gain India's goodwill and utilize her re- 
sources fully in the war against Japan. Yet one-sided and ten- 
dentious propaganda inevitably produced results, and there was 
a feeling that the Indian problem was far too complicated for 
them to tackle, and anyway it was difficult for them to interfere 
in the affairs of their British ally. 

What those in authority, or people generally, in Russia thought 
about India it was impossible to say. They were far too busy with 
their stupendous war effort, and with driving the invader from 
their country, to think of matters of no immediate concern to 
them. Yet they were used to thinking far ahead and they were 
not likely to ignore India which touched their frontiers in Asia. 
What their future policy would be no one could say, except that 
it would be realistic and principally concerned with adding to 
the political and economic strength of the U.S.S.R. They had 
carefully avoided all reference to India, but Stalin had declared 
in November, 1942, on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary 
of the Soviet Revolution, that their general policy was: 'Aboli- 
tion of racial exclusiveness, equality of nations and integrity of 
their territories, liberation of the enslaved nations and restoration 
of their sovereign rights, the right of every nation to arrange its 
affairs as it wishes, economic aid to nations that have suffered 
and assistance to them in attaining their material welfare, resto- 
ration of democratic liberties, the destruction of the Hitlerite 
regime.' 

In China, it was evident that, whatever the reaction of the 
people to any particular action of ours, their sympathies were 
entirely on the side of Indian freedom. That sympathy had histo- 
rical roots, but, even more so, it was based on the realization 
that unless India was free, China's freedom might be endangered. 
It was not in China only but throughout Asia, Egypt, and the 
Middle East, Indian freedom had become a symbol of a larger 
freedom for other subject and dependent countries, a test in the 
present and a measuring rod for the future. Mr. Wendell Willkie 
in his book — 'One World' — says: 'Many men and women I have 
talked with from Africa to Alaska asked me the question which 
has become almost a symbol all through Asia: What about India? 
.. .From Cairo on, it confronted me at every turn. The wisest 
man in China said to me: "When the aspiration of India for 
freedom was put aside to some future date, it was not Great 
Britain that suffered in public esteem in the Far East. It was the 
United States." ' 

What had happened in India had compelled the world to look 
at India for a while, even in the midst of the war crisis, and to 
think of the basic problems of the east; it had stirred the mind 
•492 



and heart of every country of Asia. Even though, for the moment, 
the Indian people appeared helpless in the powerful grip of British 
imperialism, they had demonstrated that there would be no peace 
in India or Asia unless India was free. 

Reactions in India 

Foreign rule over a civilized community suffers from many dis- 
advantages and many ills follow in its train. One of these dis- 
advantages is that it has to rely on the less desirable elements 
in the population.. The idealists, the proud, the sensitive, the 
self-respecting, those who care sufficiently for freedom and are 
not prepared to degrade themselves by an enforced submission 
to an alien authority, keep aloof or come into conflict with it. 
The proportion of careerists and opportunists in its ranks is much 
higher than it would normally be in a free country. Even in an 
independent country with an autocratic form of government 
many sensitive people are unable to co-operate in governmental 
activities, and there are very few opportunities for the release of 
new talent. 

An alien government, which must necessarily be authoritarian 
suffers from all these disadvantages and adds to them, for it has 
always to function in an atmosphere of hostility and suppression. 
Fear becomes the dominant motive of both the government and 
the people, and the most important services are the police and 
the secret service. 

When there is an actual conflict between the Government and 
the people, this tendency to rely on and encourage the undesir- 
able elements in the population becomes even more strongly 
marked. Many conscientious people, of course, through force of 
circumstances, have to continue functioning in the governmental 
structure, whether they like it or not. But those who come to 
the top and play the most important roles are chosen for their 
anti-nationalism, their subservience, their capacity to crush and 
humiliate their own countrymen. The highest merit is opposi- 
tion, often the result of personal rivalries and disappointments, 
to the sentiments and feelings of the great majority of the people. 

In this turgid and unwholesome atmosphere no idealism or 
noble sentiment has any place, and the prizes held out are high 
positions and big salaries. The incompetence or worse failings 
of the supporters of government have to be tolerated, for the 
measure of everything is the active support given to that govern- 
ment in crushing its opponents. This leads to government cohabit- 
ing with strange groups and very odd persons. Corruption, cruelty, 
callousness, and a complete disregard of the public welfare flourish 
and poison the air.* 

* The Bengal Administrative Inquiry Committee, presided over by Sir Archibald R inlands, 

•493 



While much that the Government does is bitterly resented, far 
greater resentment is caused by those Indian supporters of it 
who become more royalist than the king. The average Indian 
has a feeling of disgust and nausea at this behaviour, and to him 
such people are comparable to the men of Vichy or the puppet 
regimes set up by the German and Japanese governments. This 
feeling is not confined to Congress men but extends to members 
of the Moslem League and other organizations, and is expressed 
even by the most moderate of our politicians.* 

The war afforded a sufficient excuse and was a cover for 
intense anti-national activities of the Government and novel 
forms of propaganda. Mushroom labour groups were financed to 
build up "labour morale,' and newspapers containing scurrilous 
attacks on Gandhi and the Congress were started and subsidized, 
in spite of the paper shortage which came in the way of other 
newspapers functioning. Official advertisements, supposed to be 
connected with the war effort, were also utilized for this purpose. 
Information centres were opened in foreign countries to carry on 
continuous propaganda on behalf of the Government of India. 
Crowds of undistinguished and often unknown individuals were 
sent on officially organized deputations, especially to the U.S.A., 
despite the protest of the central assembly, to act as propaganda 
agents and stools of the British Government. Persons holding 
independent views or critical of Government policy had no chance 
of going abroad; they could neither get a passport nor transport 
facilities. 

All these and many other devices have been employed by the 
Government during the last two years to create a semblance of 
what it considers 'public tranquillity.' Political and public life 
becomes dormant, as, indeed, it must in a country more or less 
under military occupation and rule. But this forcible suppres- 

in their report, issued in May, 1945, say: 'So widespread has corruption become, and so 
defeatist is the attitude taken towards it, that we think that the most drastic steps should be 
taken to stamp out the evil which has corrupted the public service and public morals. ' The 
Committee received, with surprise and regret, evidence that the attitude of some civil servants 
towards the public left much to be desired. It was stated that 'they adopt an attitude of aloof 
superiority, appear to pay greater regard to the mechanical operation of a soulless machine 
than to promoting the welfare of the people and look upon themselves rather as masters than 
as servants of the people. ' 

* Hitler, an expert in compelling others to submit to his yoke, says in 'Mein Kampf: 
'We must not expect embodiments of characterless submission suddenly to repent in order, on 
the basis of intelligence and all human experience, to act otherwise than hitherto. On the 
contrary, these very people will hold every such lesson at a distance, until the notion is 
either once and for all accustomed to its slave's yoke, or until better forces push to the 
surface to wrest power from the infamous corrupters. In the first case these people 
continue to feel not at all badly since they not infrequently are entrusted by the victors 
with the office of slave overseer, which these characterless types then exercise over their 
own nation and that generally more heartlessly than any alien beast imposed by the 
enemy himself. ' 

•494 



sion of symptoms can only cause an aggravation of the disease, 
and India is very sick. Prominent Indian conservatives, who 
have always tried to co-operate with the Government, have been 
filled with anxiety at this volcano which has been temporarily 
sealed at its mouth, and they have stated that they have never 
known such bitterness against the British Government. 

I do not know and cannot tell till I come into contact with 
my people how they have changed during these two years and 
what feelings stir in their hearts, but I have little doubt that these 
recent experiences have changed them in many ways. I have 
looked into my own mind from time to time and examined its 
almost involuntary reaction to events. I had always looked for- 
ward in the past to a visit to England, because I have many 
friends there and old memories draw me. But now I found that 
there was no such desire and the idea was distasteful. I wanted 
to keep as far away from England as possible, and I had no wish 
even to discuss India's problems with Englishmen. And then I 
remembered some friends and softened a little, and I told myself 
how wrong it was to judge a whole people in this way. I thought 
also of the terrible experiences that the English people had gone 
through in this war, of the continuous strain in which they had 
lived, of the loss of so many of their loved ones. All this helped 
to tone down my feelings, but that basic reaction remained. 
Probably time and the future will lessen it and give another pers- 
pective. But if I, with all my associations with England and the 
English, could feel that way, what of others who had lacked those 
contacts ? 

India's Sickness: Famine 

India was very sick, both in mind and body. While some people 
had prospered during the war, the burden on others had reached 
breaking point, and as an awful reminder of this came famine, 
a famine of vast dimensions affecting Bengal and east and south 
India. It was the biggest and most devastating famine in India 
during the past 170 years of British dominion, comparable to 
those terrible famines which occurred from 1766 to 1770 in 
Bengal and Bihar as an early result of the establishment of British 
rule. Epidemics followed, especially cholera and malaria, and 
spread to other provinces, and even to-day they are taking their 
toll of scores of thousands of lives. Millions have died of famine 
and disease and yet that spectre hovers over India and claims its 
victims.* 

* Estimates of the number of deaths by famine in Bengal in 1943-44 vary greatly. The 
Department of Anthropology of the Calcutta University carried out an extensive scientific 
survey of sample groups in the famine areas. They arrived at the figure of about 3,400,000 
total deaths by famine in Bengal. It was also found that during 1943 and 1944, 46 per 

•495 



This famine unveiled the picture of India as it was below the 
thin veneer of the prosperity of a small number of people at the 
top — a picture of poverty and ugliness of British rule. That was 
the culmination and fulfilment of British rule in India. It was 
no calamity of nature or play of the elements that brought this 
famine, nor was it caused by actual war operations and enemy 
blockade. Every competent observer is agreed that it was a man- 
made famine which could have been foreseen and avoided. Every 
one is agreed that there was amazing indifference, incompetence, 
and complacency shown by all the authorities concerned. Right 
up to the last moment, when thousands were dying daily in the 
public streets, famine was denied and references to it in the Press 
were suppressed by the censors. When the Statesman, newspaper 
of Calcutta, published gruesome and ghastly pictures of starving 
and dying women and children in the streets of Calcutta, a spokes- 
man of the Government of India, speaking officially in the central 
assembly, protested against the 'dramatization' of the situation; 
to him apparently it was a normal occurrence for thousands to 
die daily from starvation in India. Mr. Amery, of the India Office 
in London, distinguished himself especially by his denials and 
statements. And then, when it became impossible to deny or 
cloak the existence of widespread famine, each group in authority 
blamed some other group for it. The Government of India said 
it was the fault of the provincial government, which itself was 
merely a puppet government functioning under the Governor 
and through the civil service. They were all to blame, but most 
of all inevitably that authoritarian government which the Viceroy 
represented in his person and which could do what it chose any- 
where in India. In any democratic or semi-democratic country 
such a calamity would have swept away all the governments con- 
cerned with it. Not so in India where everything continued as 
before. 

Considered even from the point of view of the war, this famine 
took place in the very region which stood nearest to the theatre 
of war and possible invasion. A widespread famine and collapse 
of the economic structure would inevitably injure the capacity 
for defence and even more so for offence. Thus did the Govern- 
ment of India discharge its responsibility for India's defence and 
the prosecution of the war against the Japanese aggressors. Not 
scorched earth but scorched and starved and dead human beings 

cent of the people of Bengal suffered from major diseases. Official figures of the Bengal 
Government, based largely on unreliable reports from village patwaris or headmen, gave a 
much lower figure. The official Famine Inquiry Commission, presided over by Sir John 
Woodhead, has come to the conclusion that about 1,500,000 deaths occurred in Bengal 'as 
a direct result of the famine and the epidemics which followed in its train. ' All these figures 
relate to Bengal alone. Many other parts ofthe country also sufferedfrom famine and epidemic 
diseases consequent upon it. 

•496 



by the million in this vital war area were the emblems of the policy 
that Government had pursued. 

Indian non-official organizations from all over the country did 
good work in bringing relief, and so did those efficient humani- 
tarians, the Quakers of England. The central and provincial 
governments also at last woke up and realized the immensity of 
the crisis and the army was utilized in the relief operations. For 
the moment something was done to check the spread of famine 
and mitigate its after-effects. But the relief was temporary and 
those after-effects continue, and no one knows when famine may 
not descend again on an even worse scale. Bengal is broken up, 
her social and economic life shattered, and an enfeebled gene- 
ration left as survivors. 

While all this was happening and the streets of Calcutta were 
strewn with corpses, the social life of the upper ten thousand of 
Calcutta underwent no change. There was dancing and feasting 
and a flaunting of luxury, and life was gay. There was no ration- 
ing even till a much later period. The horse races in Calcutta 
continued and attracted their usual fashionable throngs. Trans- 
port was lacking for food, but racehorses came in special boxes 
by rail from other parts of the country. In this gay life both 
Englishmen and Indians took part for both had prospered in the 
business of war and money was plentiful. Sometimes that money 
had been gained by profiteering in the very foodstuffs, the lack of 
which was killing tens of thousands daily. 

India, it is often said, is a land of contrasts, of some very rich 
and many very poor, of modernism and mediasvalism, of rulers 
and ruled, of the British and Indians. Never before had these 
contrasts been so much in evidence as in the city of Calcutta 
during those terrible months of famine in the latter half of 1943. 
The two worlds, normally living apart, almost ignorant of each 
other, were suddenly brought physically together and existed 
side by side. The contrast was startling, but even more startling 
was the fact that many people did not realize the horror and 
astonishing incongruity of it and continued to function in their 
old grooves. What they felt one cannot say; one can only judge 
them by their actions. For most Englishmen this was perhaps 
easier for they had lived their life apart and, caste-bound as they 
were, they could not vary their old routine, even if some indivi- 
duals felt the urge to do so. But those Indians who functioned 
in this way showed the wide gulf that separated them from their 
own people, which no considerations even of decency and hu- 
manity could bridge. 

The famine, like every great crisis, brought out both the good 
qualities and the failings of the Indian people. Large numbers 
of them, including the most vital elements, were in prison and 
unable to help in any way. Still the relief works, organized un- 

•497 



officially, drew men and women from every class who laboured 
hard under discouraging circumstances, displaying ability, the 
spirit of mutual help and co-operation and self-sacrifice. The 
failings were also evident in those who were too full of their petty 
rivalries and jealousies to co-operate together, those who remained 
passive and did nothing to help others, and those few who were 
so denationalized and dehumanized as to care little for what was 
happening. 

The famine was a direct result of war conditions and the care- 
lessness and complete lack of foresight of those in authority. The 
indifference of the authorities to the problem of the country's 
food passes comprehension when every intelligent man who gave 
thought to the matter knew that some such crisis was approach- 
ing. The famine could have been avoided, given proper handling 
of the food situation in the earlier years of the war. In every other 
country affected by the war full attention was paid to this vital 
aspect of war economy even before the war started. 

In India, the Government of India started a food department 
three and a quarter years after the war began in Europe and over 
a year after the Japanese war started. And yet it was common 
knowledge that the Japanese occupation of Burma vitally affected 
Bengal's food supply. The Government of India had no policy 
at all in regard to food till the middle of 1943 when famine 
was already beginning its disastrous career. It is most extraord- 
inary how inefficient the Government always is in every matter 
other than the suppression of those who challenge its admini- 
stration. Or perhaps it is more correct to say that, constituted 
as it is, its mind is completely occupied in its primary task of 
ensuring its own continuance. Only an actual crisis forces it to 
think of other matters. That crisis again is accentuated by the 
ever-present crisis of want of confidence in the Government's 
ability and bona fides.* 

* The Famine Inquiry Commission, presided over by Sir John Woodhead (Report published 
in May, 19/5), reveal in restrained official language the tragic succession of official errors 
and private greed which led to the Bengal famine. 'It has been for us a sad task,' they say, 
'to inquire into the course and causes of the Bengalfamine We have been haunted by a deep 
sense of tragedy. A million and a half of the poor of Bengal fell victims to circumstances for 
which they themselves were not responsible. Society, together with its organs, failed to protect 
its weaker members. Indeed there was a moral and social breakdown, as well as administra- 
tive breakdowns. ' They refer to the low economic level of the province, to the increasing 
pressure on land not relieved by growth of industry, to the fact that a considerable section of 
the population was living on the margin of subsistence and was uncapable of standing any 
severe economic stress, to the very bad health conditions and low standards of nutrition, to 
the absence of a 'margin of safety' as regards either health or wealth. They consider the 
more immediate causes to be: the failure of the season's crop, the fall of Burma leading to 
stoppage of imports of Burma rice, to the 'denial' policy of Government which brought ruin 
to certain poorer classes, to the military demands on food and transport, and the lack of 
confidence in the Government. They condemn the policy, or often the lack of policy or the 
ever-changing policy, of both the Government of India and of the Bengal Government; their 
inability to think ahead and provide for coming events; their refusal to recognize and declare 

•498 



Though the famine was undoubtedly due to war conditions 
and could have been prevented, it is equally true that its deeper 
causes lay in the basic policy which was impoverishing India 
and under which millions lived on the verge of starvation. In 
1933 Major General Sir John Megaw, the Director-General of 
the Indian Medical Service, wrote in the course of a report on 
public health in India: 'Taking India as a whole the dispensary 
doctors regard 39 per cent of the people as being well nourished, 
41 per cent as poorly nourished, and 20 per cent as very badly 
nourished. The most depressing picture is painted by the doctors 
of Bengal who regard only 22 per cent of the people of the pro- 
vince as being well nourished while 31 per cent are considered to 
be very badly nourished.' 

The tragedy of Bengal and the famines of Orissa, Malabar, 
and other places are the final judgment on British rule in India. 
The British will certainly leave India, and their Indian Empire 
will become a memory, but what will they leave when they have 
to go, what human degradation and accumulated sorrow? Tagore 
saw this picture as he lay dying three years ago: 'But what kind of 
India will they leave behind, what stark misery? When the stream 
of their centuries' administration runs dry at last, what a waste 
of mud and filth they will leave behind them!' 

India's Dynamic Capacity 

The stream of life goes on in spite of famine and war, full of its 
inherent contradictions, and finding sustenance even in those 
contradictions and the disasters that follow in their train. Nature 
renews itself and covers yesterday's battlefield with flowers and 

famine even when it had come; their totally inadequate measures to meet the situation. They 
go on to say: 'But often considering all the circumstances, we cannot avoid the conclusion 
that it lay in the power of the Govtrnment of Bengal, by hold, resolute and well-conceived 
measures at the right time to have largely prevented the tragedy of the famine as it actually 
took place. Further, that the Government of India failed to recognize at a sufficiently early 
date the need for a system of planned movement of food grains.... The Government of 
India must share with the Bengal Government responsibility for the decision to decontrol 
in March, I9t3.. . . The subsequent proposal of the Government of India to introduce free 
trade throughout the greater part of India was quite unjustified and should not have been 
put forward. Its application, successfully resisted by many of the provinces and states. . . might 
have led to serious catastrophies in various parts of India. ' 

After referring to the apathy and mismanagement of the governmental apparatus both 
at the centre and in the province, the Commission say that 'the public in Bengal, or at 
least certain sections of it, have also their share of blame. We have referred to the atmosphere 
of fear and greed which, in the absence of control, was one of the causes of the rapid rise 
in the price level. Enormous profits were made out of the calamity, and in the circumstances 
profits for some meant death for others. A large part of the community lived in plenty while 
others starved, and there was much indifference inface of suffering. Corruption was widespread 
throughout the province and in many classes of society.' The total profit made in this traffic 
of starvation and death is estimated at 150 crores of rupees (Rs. 1,500 millions). Thus if 
there were a million and a half deaths by famine, each death was balanced by roughly a 
1,000 rupees of excess profit! 

•499 



green grass, and the blood that was shed feeds the soil and gives 
strength and colour to new life. Human beings with their unique 
quality of possessing memory live in their storied and remembered 
pasts and seldom catch up to the present in 'The worlde that 
neweth every daie.' And that present slips into the past before we 
are hardly aware of it; to-day, child of yesterday, yields place to 
its own offspring, to-morrow. Winged victory ends in a welter of 
blood and mud; and out of the heavy trials of seeming defeat the 
spirit emerges with new strength and wider vision. The weak in 
spirit yield and are eliminated, but others carry the torch forward 
and hand it to the standard-bearers of to-morrow. 

The famine in India brought some realization of the terrible 
urgency of India's problems, of the overwhelming disaster that 
hung over the country. What people in England felt about it I 
do not know, but some of them, as is their way, cast the blame 
on India and her people. There was lack of food, lack of doctors, 
lack of sanitation and medical supplies, lack of transport, lack 
of everything except human beings, for the population had grown 
and seemed to be growing. This excessive population of an improvi- 
dent race, growing without notice or warning and upsetting the 
plans or planlessness of a benevolent government, must be to 
blame. And so, economic problems suddenly assumed a new 
importance and we were told that politics and political problems 
had to be put aside, as if politics has any meaning at all unless 
it can solve the major problems of the day. The Government of 
India, one of the few representatives of the laissez-faire tradition 
in the world, began to talk of planning, but of organized planning 
it had no notion. It could only think in terms of preserving the 
existing structure and its own and allied vested interests. 

The reaction on the people of India was deeper and more 
powerful, though it found little public expression owing to the 
widespread tentacles of the Defence of India Act and its rules. 
There had been a complete collapse of the economic structure of 
Bengal and tens of millions of people had been literally broken 
up. Bengal was an extreme example of what was happening in 
many parts of India and it seemed that there could be no going 
back to the old economy. Even the industrialists who had pros- 
pered so much during the war were shaken up and compelled to 
look beyond their narrow sphere. They were realists in their own 
way, rather afraid of the idealism of some of the politicians, but 
that realism itself led them to far-reaching conclusions. A number 
of Bombay industrialists, chiefly connected with the Tata enter- 
prises, produced a fifteen-year plan for India's development. 
That plan is still not complete and there are many lacunae in it. 
Inevitably it is conditioned by the ways of thinking of big industry 
and tries to avoid revolutionary changes as far as possible. Yet 

•500 



the very pressure of events in India has forced them to think in 
a big way and to go out of many of their accustomed grooves of 
thought. Revolutionary changes are inherent in the plan, though 
the authors may themselves not like some of them. Some of these 
authors of the plan were members of the national planning com- 
mittee and they have taken advantage of a part of its work. This 
plan will undoubtedly have to be varied, added to and worked out 
in many ways, but, coming from conservative quarters, it is a wel- 
come and encouraging sign of the way India must go. It is based on 
a free India and on the political and economic unity of India. 
The conservative banker's view of money is not allowed to domi- 
nate the scene, and it is emphasized that the real capital of the 
country consists of its resources in material and manpower. The 
success of this or any otheir plan must inevitably depend not merely 
on production but on a proper and equitable distribution of the 
national wealth created. Also, agrarian reform is a fundamental 
prerequisite. 

The idea of planning and a planned society is accepted now in 
varying degrees by almost everyone. But planning by itself has 
little meaning and need not necessarily lead to good results. 
Everything depends on the objectives ofthe plan and on the control- 
ling authority, as well as, of course, the government behind it. 
Does the plan aim definitely at the well-being and advancement of 
the people as a whole, at the opening out of opportunity to all 
and the growth of freedom and methods of co-operative organiza- 
tion and action? Increase ofproduction is essential, but obviously 
by itself it does not take us far and may even add to the complexity 
of our problems. An attempt to preserve old-established privileges 
and vested interests cuts at the very root of planning. Real plan- 
ning must recognize that no such special interests can be allowed 
to come in the way of any scheme designed to further the well- 
being ofthe community as a whole. The Congress governments in 
the provinces were hampered and restricted in all directions by 
the basic assumption of the Parliamentary statute that most of 
these vested interests must not be touched. Even their partial 
attempts to change the land tenure system and to impose an income- 
tax on incomes from land were challenged in the law courts. 

If planning is largely controlled by big industrialists, it will 
naturally be envisaged within the framework of the system they 
are used to, and will be essentially based on the profit motive of 
an acquisitive society. However well-intentioned they might be, 
and some of them certainly are full of good intentions, it is diffi- 
cult for them to think on new lines. Even when they talk of state 
control of industry they think ofthe state more or less as it is to-day. 

We are sometimes told that the present Government of India, 
with its ownership and control of railways, and a growing control 

•501 



of and interference in industry, finance, and, indeed, life in general, 
is moving in a socialist direction. But this is something utterly 
different from democratic state control, apart from being essentially 
foreign control. Though there is a limitation of certain capitalist 
functions, the system is based on the protection of privilege. The 
old authoritarian colonial system ignored economic problems 
except in so far as certain special interests were concerned. Finding 
itself unable to meet the necessities of the new situation by its old 
laissez-faire methods, and yet bent on preserving its authoritarian 
character, it goes inevitably in a fascist direction. It tries to control 
economic operations by fascist methods, suppresses such civil 
liberties as exist, and adapts its own autocratic government as well 
as the capitalist system, with some variations, to the new conditions. 
Thus the endeavour is, as in fascist countries, to build up a mono- 
lithic state, with considerable control of industry and national 
life, and with many limitations on free enterprise, but based on 
the old foundations. This is very far from socialism; indeed, it is 
absurd to talk of socialism in a country dominated by an alien 
power. Whether such an attempt can succeed, even in a temporary 
sense, is very doubtful, for it only aggravates the existing problems; 
but war conditions certainly give it a favourable environment to 
work in. Even a complete nationalization (so-called) of industry 
unaccompanied by political democracy will lead only to a different 
kind of exploitation, for while industry will then belong to the 
state, the state itself will not belong to the people. 

Our major difficulties in India are due to the fact that we 
consider our problems - economic, social, industrial, agricul- 
tural, communal, Indian states — within the framework of exist- 
ing conditions. Within that framework, and retaining the 
privileges and special "status that are part of it, they become 
impossible of solution. Even if some patchwork solution is arrived 
at under stress of circumstances, it does not and cannot last. The 
old problems continue and new problems, or new aspects of old 
problems, are added to them. This approach of ours is partly 
due to tradition and old habit, but essentially it is caused by the 
steel-frame of the British Government which holds together the 
ramshackle structure. 

The war has accentuated the many contradictions existing in 
India — political, economic, and social. Politically, there is a 
great deal of talk of Indian freedom and independence, and yet 
her people have probably at no time in their long history been 
subjected to such authoritarian rule and intensive and wide- 
spread repression as exist to-day, and out of this to-day to- 
morrow will necessarily grow. Economically, British domination 
is also paramount, and yet the expansive tendency of Indian 
economy is continually straining at the leash. There is famine 
and widespread misery and, on the other hand, there is an 
502 



accumulation of capital. Poverty and riches go side by side, 
decay and building up, disruption and unity, dead thought and 
new. Behind all the distressing features there is an inner vitality 
which cannot be suppressed. 

Outwardly the war has encouraged India's industrial growth 
and production, and yet it is doubtful how far this has led to 
the establishment of new industries, or is merely an extension 
and diversion of old industries. The apparent stability of the 
index of India's industrial activity during war-time indicates 
that no fundamental advance has been made. Indeed, some 
competent observers are of the opinion that the war and British 
policy during it have actually had a hampering effect on India's 
industrial growth. Dr. John Mathai, an eminent economist and 
a director of Tata's, said recently: 'The general belief. . .that 
the war has tremendously accelerated India's industrial progress 
is a proposition which, to say the least, would need a lot of 
proving. While it is true that certain established industries have 
increased their production in response to the war demand, seve- 
ral new industries of fundamental importance to the country, 
which had been projected before the war have, under stress of 
war conditions, been either abandoned or been unable to reach 
completion. My personal view is that, on a careful balance of 
the various factors in the situation, it will be found that, unlike 
countries such as Canada and Australia, the war has been more 
a hampering than an accelerating influence in India. I agree, 
however. . . that India has sufficient potential capacity to supply 
her basic manufactured needs.' Such statistical evidence of in- 
dustrial activity as is available supports this view, and indicates 
that if pre-war progress could have been maintained at the old 
rate it would have led not only to the establishment of new 
industries, but also to far greater production as a whole.* 

What the war has demonstrated beyond a shadow of a doubt 
is India's capacity to convert this potential into actuality with 
remarkable speed, given the opportunity to do so. Functioning 
as an economic unit, she has accumulated large capital assets 

*Mr. J. R. D. Tata, speaking in London on May 30th, 1945, also denied that the war had 
enabled India materially to expand her industries and industrial capacity. 'There may have 
been isolated cases of expansion, but on the whole, when armament factories and other specia- 
lized industries connected with the war have been excluded, there has been none. A number 
of projects would have been started if there had been no war. I can speak from personal 
experience of projects that have been abandoned because of the impossibility of obtaining 
bricks, steel, and machinery. Those who talk about industrial and economic progress in 
India during the war do not know the true position. ' Again he said: I must prick this 
bubble. It is nonsense to say that India has materially advanced and gained by the war. For 
one reason or another there has been no important progress or development in India. Rather 
there has been considerable retardation. In fact what has happened is this. As a result of the 
war and India's contribution towards it, we have millions dead in Bengal owing to famine. 
We also have had famine of cloth. Thus, it is clear, that economic progress has been con- 
spicuous by its absence. ' 

•503 



within five war years, in spite of all the obstructions placed in 
her way. These assets are in the form of sterling securities which 
are not available to her and which, it is stated, will be blocked 
in the future. These sterling securities represent the expendi- 
ture incurred by the Government of India on behalf of the British 
Government as well as the U.S.A. They also represent the hunger, 
famine, epidemics, emasculation, weakened resistance, stunted 
growth, and death by starvation and disease of vast numbers of 
human beings in India. 

Because of the accumulation of capital assets, India has paid 
off her big debt to England and has become a creditor country. 
Owing to gross negligence and mismanagement, tremendous 
suffering has been caused to the people of India, but the fact 
remains that India can accumulate these huge sums in a short 
period of time. The actual expenditure on the war incurred by 
India in five years greatly exceeds the total British investments 
in India during more than 100 years. This fact brings into pro- 
per perspective how little the progress made in India has been 
during the past century of British administration — railways, 
irrigation works and the like of which we hear so much. It also 
demonstrates the enormous capacity of India to advance with 
rapidity on all fronts. If this striking effort can be made under 
discouraging conditions and under a foreign government which 
disapproves of industrial growth in India, it is obvious tlu-t 
planned development under a free national government would 
completely change the face of India within a few years. 

There is a curious habit of the British of appraising their 
economic and social achievement in present-day India by criteria 
derived from social achievement here or elsewhere in the distant 
past. They compare, with evident satisfaction to themselves, what 
they have done in India during their regime with changes made 
some hundreds of years ago. The fact that the industrial revolu- 
tion, and more especially the vast technological improvements 
of the past fifty years or so, have entirely changed the pace and 
tempo of life somehow escapes them when they think of India. 
They forget also that India was not a barren, sterile, and bar- 
barous country when they came here, but a highly evolved and 
cultured nation which had temporarily become static and back- 
ward in technical achievements. 

What values and standards are we to apply in making such 
comparisons? The Japanese made Manchukuo within eight 
years highly industrialized for their own purposes; more coal 
was being produced there than in India after many generations 
of British effort. Their material record in Korea compares well 
with other colonial empires.* And yet behind these records there 

*Hallett Abend, who was the New York Times correspondent in the Far East for manyyears, 
says in his book 'Pacific Charter' (1943): 'In fairness to the Japanese it must be conceded 

•504 



is slavery, cruelty, humiliation, exploitation, and the attempt 
to destroy the soul of a people. The nazis and the Japanese have 
created new records in the inhuman suppression of subject 
peoples and races. We are often reminded of this and told that 
the British have not treated us quite so badly. Is that to be the 
new measure and standard of comparison and judgement? 

There is a great deal of pessimism in India to-day and a 
sense of frustration, and both can be understood, for events have 
dealt harshly with our people and the future is not promising. 
But there is also below the surface a stirring and a pushing, 
signs of a new life and vitality, and unknown forces are at work. 
Leaders function at the top but they are driven in particular 
directions by the anonymous and unthinking will of an awaken- 
ing people, who seem to be outgrowing their past. 

India's Growth Arrested 

A nation, like an individual, has many personalities, many 
approaches to life. If there is a sufficiently strong organic bond 
between these different personalities, it is well; otherwise those 
personalities split up and lead to disintegration and trouble. 
Normally, there is a continuous process of adjustment going on 
and some kind of an equilibrium is established. If normal develop- 
ment is arrested, or sometimes if there is some rapid change which 
is not easily assimilated, then conflict arises between those different 
personalities. In the mind and spirit of India, below the surface 
of our superficial conflicts and divisions, there has been this funda- 
mental conflict due to a long period of arrested growth. A society, 
if it is to be both stable and progressive, must have a certain more 
or less fixed foundation of principles as well as a dynamic outlook. 
Both appear to be necessary. Without the dynamic outlook there 
is stagntaion and decay, without some fixed basis of principle 
there is likely to be disintegration and destruction. 

In India from the earliest days there was a search for those 
basic principles, for the unchanging, the universal, the absolute. 
Yet the dynamic outlook was also present and an appreciation 
of life and the changing world. On these two foundations a 

that in a material sense they have done a magnificent job in Korea. When they took it over 
the country was filthy, unhealthy, and woefully poverty-striken. The mountains had been 
denuded of their forests, the valleys were subject to recurrent floods, decent roads were non- 
existent, illiteracy was prevalent, and typhoid, smallpox, cholera, dysentery, and the plague 
were epidemic annually. To-day the mountai.is are reafforested; railway, telephone, and 
telegraph systems are excellent; the public health service is highly efficient, good highways 
abound; flood-control and irrigation works have vastly increased the food production, and 
fine harbours have been developed and well managed. The country has become so prosperous 
and healthy that the 1905 population of 11,000,000 has risen to 24,000,000 and the 
average scale of living to-day is almost immeasurably higher than it was at the turn of the 
century.' But Mr. Abend points out that all this material improvement has not been insti- 
tuted for the benefit of the Korean people but so that greater profits might go to the Japanese. 

•505 



stable and progressive society was built up, though the stress 
was always more on stability and security and the survival of 
the race. In later years the dynamic aspect began to fade away, 
and in the name of eternal principles the social structure was 
made rigid and unchanging. It was, as a matter of fact, not 
wholly rigid and it did change gradually and continuously. But 
the ideology behind it and the general framework continued 
unchanged. The group idea as represented by more or less 
autonomous castes, the joint family and the communal self- 
governing life of the village were the main pillars of this system, 
and all these survived for so long because, in spite of their failings, 
they fulfilled some essential needs of human nature and society. 
They gave security, stability to each group and a sense of group 
freedom. Caste survived because it continued to represent the 
general power-relationships of society, and class privileges were 
maintained, not only because of the prevailing ideology, but also 
because they were supported by vigour, intelligence, and ability, 
as well as a capacity for self-sacrifice. That ideology was not 
based on a conflict of rights but on the individual's obligations to 
others and a satisfactory performance of his duties, on co-operation 
within the group and between different groups, and essentially on 
the idea of promoting peace rather than war. While the social 
system was rigid, no limit was placed on the freedom of the mind. 

Indian civilization achieved much that it was aiming at, but, 
in that very achievement, life began to fade away, for it is too 
dynamic to exist for long in a rigid, unchanging environment. 
Even those basic principles, which are said to be unchanging, 
lose their freshness and reality when they are taken for granted 
and the search for them ceases. Ideas of truth, beauty, and 
freedom decay, and we become prisoners following a deadening 
routine. 

The very thing India lacked, the modern West possessed and 
possessed to excess. It had the dynamic outlook. It was engrossed 
in the changing world, caring little for ultimate principles, the 
unchanging, the universal. It paid little attention to duties and 
obligations and emphasized rights. It was active, aggressive, 
acquisitive, seeking power and domination, living in the present 
and ignoring the future consequences of its actions. Because it 
was dynamic, it was progressive and full of life, but that life 
was a fevered one and the temperature kept on rising progressively. 

If Indian civilization went to seed because it became static, 
self-absorbed and inclined to narcissism, the civilization of the 
modern West, with all its great and manifold achievements, 
does not appear to have been a conspicuous success or to have 
thus far solved the basic problems of life. Conflict is inherent 
in it and periodically it indulges in self-destruction on a colossal 
scale. It seems to lack something to give it stability, some basic 

•506 



principles to give meaning to life though what these are I can- 
not say. Yet because it is dynamic and full of life and curiosity, 
there is hope for it. 

India, as well as China, must learn from the West, for the 
modern West has much to teach, and the spirit of the age is re- 
presented by the West. But the West is also obviously in need 
of learning much and its advances in technology will bring it 
little comfort if it does not learn some of the deeper lessons 
of life, which have absorbed the minds of thinkers in all ages 
and in all countries. 

India has become static and yet it would be utterly wrong to 
imagine that she was unchanging. No change at all means death. 
Her very survival as a highly evolved nation shows that there 
was some process of continuous adaptation going on. When the 
British came to India, though technologically somewhat back- 
ward, she was still among the advanced commercial nations of 
the world. Technical changes would undoubtedly have come 
and changed India as they have changed some western countries. 
But her normal development was arrested by the British power. 
Industrial growth was checked and as a consequence social 
growth was also arrested. The normal power-relationships of 
society could not adjust themselves and find an equilibrium, as 
all power was concentrated in the alien authority, which based 
itself on force and encouraged groups and classes which had 
ceased to have any real significance. Indian life thus progressively 
became more artificial, for many of the individuals and groups 
who seemed to play an important role in it had no vital functions 
left and were there only because of the importance given to them 
by the alien power. They had long ago finished their role in 
history and would have been pushed aside by new forces if they 
had not been given foreign protection. They became straw- 
stuffed symbols of proteges of foreign authority, thereby cutting 
themselves still further away from the living currents of the 
nation. Normally, they would have been weeded out or diverted 
to some more appropriate function by revolution or democratic 
process. But so long as foreign authoritarian rule continued, no 
such development could take place. And so India was cluttered 
up with these emblems of the past and the real changes that 
were taking place were hidden behind an artificial fagade. No 
true social balances or power-relationships within society could 
develop or become evident, and unreal problems assumed an 
undue importance. 

Most of our problems to-day are due to this arrested growth 
and the prevention by British authority of normal adjustments 
taking place. The problem of the Indian princes is easily capable 
of solution if the external factor is removed. The minorities 
problem is utterly unlike any minority problem elsewhere; 

•507 



indeed it is not a minority problem at all. There are many aspects 
of it and no doubt we are to blame for it in the past and in the 
present. And yet, at the back of these and other problems is the 
desire of the British Government to preserve, as far as possible, 
the existing economy and political organization of the Indian 
people, and, for this purpose, to encourage and preserve the 
socially backward groups in their present condition. Political and 
economic progress has not only been directly prevented, but also 
made dependent on the agreement of reactionary groups and vested 
interests, and this may be purchased only by confirming them in 
their privileged positions or giving them a dominating voice in 
future arrangement, and thus putting formidable obstacles in the 
way of real change and progress. A new constitution, in order to 
have strength and effectiveness behind it, should not only represent 
the wishes ofthe vast majority of the people but should. also reflect 
the inter-relation of social forces and their power relationships at 
the time. The main difficulty in India has been that constitutional 
arrangements for the future suggested by the British, or even by 
many Indians, ingore present social forces, and much more so 
potential ones which have long been arrested and are now breaking 
out, and try to impose and make rigid an order based on a past and 
vanishing relationship which has no real relevance to-day. 

The fundamental reality in India is British military occupa- 
tion and the policy which it supports. That policy has been ex- 
pressed in many ways and has often been cloaked in dubious 
phrases, but latterly, under a soldier Viceroy, it has been ex- 
pressed with clarity. That military occupation is to continue so 
long as the British can help it. But there are certain limits to 
the application of force. It leads not only to the growth of oppos- 
ing forces but to many other consequences unthought of by those 
who rely upon it too much. 

We see the consequences of this enforced stunting of India's 
growth and this arresting of her progress. The most obvious 
fact is the sterility of British rule in India and the thwarting of 
Indian life by it. Alien rule is inevitably cut off from the creative 
energies of the people it dominates. When this alien rule has 
its own economic and cultural centre far from the subject coun- 
try and is further backed by racialism, this divorce is complete, 
and leads to spiritual and cultural starvation of the subject 
peoples. The only real scope that the nation's creative energy 
finds is in some kind of opposition to that rule, and yet that 
scope itself is limited and the outlook becomes narrow and one- 
sided. That opposition represents the conscious or unconscious 
effort of the living and growing forces to break through the 
shell that confines them and is thus a progressive and inevitable 
tendency. But it is too single-track and negative to have full 
touch with many aspects of reality in our lives. Complexes and 

•508 



prejudices and phobias grow and darken the mind, mental idols 
of the group and the community take shape, and slogans and 
set phrases take the place of inquiry into real problems. Within 
the farmework of a sterile alien rule no effective solutions are 
possible, and national problems, unable to find solution, be- 
come even more acute. We have arrived in India at a stage 
when no half measures can solve our problems, no advance on 
one sector is enough. There has to be a big jump and advance 
all along the line, or the alternative may be overwhelming 
catastrophe. 

As in the world as a whole, so in India, it is a race between 
the forces of peaceful progress and construction and those of 
disruption and disaster, with each succeeding disaster on a 
bigger scale than the previous one. We can view this prospect 
as optimists or as pessimists, according to our predilections and 
mental make-up. Those who have faith in a moral ordering of 
the universe and of the ultimate triumph of virtue can, fortu- 
nately for them, function as lookers on or as helpers, and cast 
the burden on God; others will have to carry that burden on 
their own weak shoulders, hoping for the best and preparing 
for the worst. 

Religion, Philosophy, and Science 

India must break with much of her past and not allow it to 
dominate the present. Our lives are encumbered with the dead 
wood of this past; all that is dead and has served its purpose 
has to go. But that does not mean a break with, or a forgetting 
of, the vital and life-giving in that past. We can never forget 
the ideals that have moved our race, the dreams of the Indian 
people through the ages, the wisdom of the ancients, the buoyant 
energy and love of life and nature of our forefathers, their spirit 
of curiosity and mental adventure, the daring of their thought, 
their splendid achievements in literature, art and culture, their 
love of truth and beauty and freedom, the basic values that they 
set up, their understanding of life's mysterious ways, their tolera- 
tion of other ways than theirs, their capacity to absorb other 
peoples and their cultural accomplishments, to synthesize them 
and develop a varied and mixed culture; nor can we forget the 
myriad experiences which have built up our ancient race and 
lie embedded in our sub-conscious minds. We will never forget 
them or cease to take pride in that noble heritage of ours. If 
India forgets them she will no longer remain India and much 
that has made her our joy and pride will cease to be. 

It is not this that we have to break with, but all the dust and 
dirt of ages that have covered her up and hidden her inner 
beauty and significance, the excrescences and abortions that 

•509 



have twisted and petrified her spirit, set it in rigid frames, and 
stunted her growth. We have to cut away these excrescences and 
remember afresh the core of that ancient wisdom and adapt it to 
our present circumstances. We have to get out of traditional 
ways of thought and living which, for all the good they may 
have done in a past age, and there was much good in them, 
have ceased to have significance to-day. We have to make our 
own all the achievements of the human race and join up with 
others in the exciting adventure of man, more exciting to-day 
perhaps than in earlier ages, realizing that this has ceased to be 
governed by national boundaries or old divisions and is com- 
mon to the race of man everywhere. We have to revive the 
passion for truth and beauty and freedom which gives meaning 
to life, and develop afresh that dynamic outlook and spirit of 
adventure which distinguished those of our race who, in ages 
past, built our house on these strong and enduring foundations. 
Old as we are, with memories stretching back to the early dawns 
of human history and endeavour, we have to grow young again, 
in tune with our present time, with the irrepressible spirit and 
joy of youth in the present and its faith in the future. 

Truth as ultimate reality, if such there is, must be eternal, 
imperishable, unchanging. But that infinite, eternal and un- 
changing truth cannot be apprehended in its fullness by the 
finite mind of man which can only grasp, at most, some small 
aspect of it limited by time and space, and by the state of deve- 
lopment of that mind and the prevailing ideology of the period. 
As the mind develops and enlarges its scope, as ideologies change 
and new symbols are used to express that truth, new aspects of 
it come to light, though the core of it may yet be the same. 
And so, truth has ever to be sought and renewed, reshaped, and 
developed, so that, as understood by man, it might keep in line 
with the growth of his thought and the development of human 
life. Only then does it become a living truth for humanity, 
supplying the essential need for which it craves, and offering 
guidance in the present and for the future. 

But if some one aspect of the truth has been petrified by dogma 
in a past age, it ceases to grow and develop and adapt itself to 
the changing needs ofhumanity; other aspects of it remain hidden 
and it fails to answer the urgent questions of a succeeding age. It 
is no longer dynamic but static, no longer a life-giving impulse 
but dead thought and ceremonial and a hindrance to the growth 
of the mind and of humanity. Indeed, it is probably not even 
understood to the extent it was understood in that past age when 
it grew up and was clothed in the language and symbols of that 
age. For its context is different in a later age, the mental climate 
has changed, new social habits and customs have grown up, 
and it is often difficult to understand the sense, much less the 

•510 



spirit, of that ancient writing. Moreover, as Aurobindo Ghose 
has pointed out, every truth, however true in itself, yet taken 
apart from others which at once limit and complete it, becomes 
a snare to bind the intellect and a misleading dogma; for in 
reality each is one thread of a complex weft and no thread must 
be taken apart from the weft. 

Religions have helped greatly in the development of human- 
ity. They have laid down values and standards and have pointed 
out principles for the guidance of human life. But with all the 
good they have done, they have also tried to imprison truth in 
set forms and dogmas, and encouraged ceremonials and prac- 
tices which soon lose all their original meaning and become 
mere routine. While impressing upon man the awe and mystery 
of the unknown that surrounds him on all sides, they have dis- 
couraged him from trying to understand not only the unknown 
but what might come in the way of social effort. Instead of en- 
couraging curiosity and thought, they have preached a philosophy 
of submission to nature, to established churches, to the prevail- 
ing Social order, and to everything that is. The belief in a 
supernatural agency which ordains everything has led to a cer- 
tain irresponsibility on the social plane, and emotion and senti- 
mentality have taken the place of reasoned thought and inquiry. 
Religion, though it has undoubtedly brought comfort to innumer- 
able human beings and stabilized society by its values, has checked 
the tendency to change and progress inherent in human society. 

Philosophy has avoided many of these pitfalls and encouraged 
thought and inquiry. But it has usually lived in its ivory tower 
cut off from life and its day-to-day problems, concentrating on 
ultimate purposes and failing to link them with the life of man. 
Logic and reason were its guides and they took it far in many 
directions, but that logic was too much the product of the mind 
and unconcerned with fact. 

Science ignored the ultimate purposes and looked at fact alone. 
It made the world jump forward with a leap, built up a glitter- 
ing civilization, opened up innumerable avenues for the growth 
of knowledge, and added to the power of man to such an extent 
that for the first time it was possible to conceive that man could 
triumph over and shape his physical environment. Man became 
almost a geological force, changing the face of the planet earth 
chemically, physically, and in many other ways. Yet when this 
sorry scheme of things entirely seemed to be in his grasp, to mould 
it nearer to the heart's desire, there was some essential lack and 
some vital element was missing. There was no knowledge of ulti- 
mate purposes and not even an understanding of the immediate 
purpose, for science had told us nothing about any purpose in life. 
Nor did man, so powerful in his control of nature, have the 

•511 



power to control himself, and the monster he had created ran 
amok. Perhaps new developments in biology, psychology, and 
similar sciences, and the interpretation of biology and physics, 
may help man to understand and control himself more than he 
has done in the past. Or, before any such advances influence 
human life sufficiently, man may destroy the civilization he has 
built and have to start anew. 

There is no visible limit to the advance of science, if it is given 
the chance to advance. Yet it may be that the scientific method of 
observation is not always applicable to all the varieties of human 
experience and cannot cross the uncharted ocean that surrounds us. 
With the help of philosophy it may go a little further and venture 
even on these high seas. And when both science and philosophy 
fail us, we shall have to rely on such other powers of apprehension 
as we may possess. For there appears to be a definite stopping place 
beyond which reason, as the mind is at present constituted, cannot 
go. 'La derniere demarche de la raison,' says Pascal, 'c'est de 
connaitre qu'il y a une infinite de choses qui la surpassent. Elle 
est bien faible si elle ne va j usque-la.' 

Realizing these limitations of reason and scientific method, we 
have still to hold on to them with all our strength, for without 
that firm basis and background we can have no grip on any kind 
of truth or reality. It is better to understand a part of truth and 
apply it to our lives, than to understand nothing at all and flounder 
helplessly in a vain attempt to pierce the mystery of existence. 
The applications of science are inevitable and unavoidable for 
all countries and peoples to-day. But something more than its 
application is necessary. It is the scientific approach, the adventur- 
ous and yet critical temper of science, the search for truth and new 
knowledge, the refusal to accept anything without testing and 
trial, the capacity to change previous conclusions in the face of new 
evidence, the reliance on observed fact and not on pre-conceived 
theory, the hard discipline of the mind — all this is necessary, not 
merely for the application of science but for life itself and the 
solution of its many problems. Too many scientists to-day, who 
swear by science, forget all about it outside their particular spheres. 
The scientific approach and temper are, or should be, a way of 
life, a process of thinking, a method of acting and associating with 
our fellowmen. That is a large order and undoubtedly very few of 
us, if any at all, can function in this way with even partial success. 
But this criticism applies in equal or even greater measure to all 
the injunctions which philosophy and religion have laid upon us. 
The scientific temper points out the way along which man should 
travel. It is the temper of a free man. We live in a scientific age, 
so we are told, but there is little evidence of this temper in the 
people anywhere or even in their leaders. 

Science deals with the domain of positive knowledge but the 

•512 



temper which it should produce goes beyond that domain. The 
ultimate purposes of man may be said to be to gain knowledge, 
to realize truth, to appreciate goodness and beauty. The scienti- 
fic method of objective inquiry is not applicable to all these, and 
much that is vital in life seems to lie beyond its scope — the sensi- 
tiveness to art and poetry, the emotion that beauty produces, the 
inner recognition of goodness. The botanist and zoologist may 
never experience the charm and beauty of nature; the sociologist 
may be wholly lacking in love for humanity. But even when we 
go to the regions beyond the reach of the scientific method and 
visit the mountain tops where philosophy dwells and high emo- 
tions fill us, or gaze at the immensity beyond, that approach and 
temper are still necessary. 

Very different is the method of religion. Concerned as it is 
principally with the regions beyond the reach of objective in- 
quiry, it relies on emotion and intuition. And then it applies 
this method to everything in life, even to those things which are 
capable of intellectual inquiry and observation: Organized reli- 
gion, allying itself to theology and often more concerned with 
its vested interests than with things of the spirit, encourages a 
temper which is the very opposite to that of science. It produces 
narrowness and intolerance, credulity and superstition, emotio- 
nalism and irrationalism. It tends to close and limit the mind of 
man, and to produce a temper of a dependent, unfree person. 

Even if God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent Him, 
so Voltaire said — 'si Dieu n'existait pas, il faudrait l'inventer.' 
Perhaps that is true, and indeed the mind of man has always been 
trying to fashion some such mental image or conception which 
grew with the mind's growth. But there is something also in the 
reverse proposition: even if God exists, it may be desirable not 
to look up to Him or to rely upon Him. Too much dependence on 
supernatural factors may lead, and has often led, to a loss of self- 
reliance in man and to a blunting of his capacity and creative 
ability. And yet some faith seems necessary in things of the spirit 
which are beyond the scope of our physical world, some reliance 
on moral, spiritual, and idealistic conceptions, or else we have 
no anchorage, no objectives or purpose in life. Whether we believe 
in God or not, it is impossible not to believe in something, whe- 
ther we call it a creative life-giving force or vital energy inherent 
in matter which gives it its capacity for self-movement and change 
and growth, or by some other name, something that is as real, 
though elusive, as life is real when contrasted with death. Whe- 
ther we are conscious of it or not most of us worship at the in- 
visible altar of some unknown god and offer sacrifices to it — 
some ideal, personal, national or international; some distant 
objective that draws us on, though reason itself may find little 
substance in it; some vague conception of a perfect man and a 

•513 



better world. Perfection may be impossible of attainment, but the 
demon in us, some vital force, urges us on and we tread that path 
from generation to generation. 

As knowledge advances, the domain of religion, in the narrow 
sense of the word, shrinks. The more we understand life and 
nature, the less we look for supernatural causes. Whatever we 
can understand and control ceases to be a mystery. The processes 
of agriculture, the food we eat, the clothes we wear, our social 
relations, were all at one time under the dominion of religion 
and its high priests. Gradually they have passed out of its control 
and become subjects for scientific study. Yet much of this is still 
powerfully affected by religious beliefs and the superstitions that 
accompany them. The final mysteries still remain far beyond the 
reach of the human mind and are likely to continue to remain so. 
But so many of life's mysteries are capable of and await solution, 
that an obsession with the final mystery seems hardly necessary 
or justified. Life still offers not only the loveliness of the world 
but also the exciting adventure of fresh and never ceasing dis- 
coveries, of new panoramas opening out and new ways of living, 
adding to its fullness and ever making it richer and more complete. 

It is therefore with the temper and approach of science, allied 
to philosophy, and with reverence for all that lies beyond, that 
we must face life. Thus we may develop an integral vision oflife 
which embraces in its wide scope the past and the present, with 
all their hights and depths, and look with serenity towards the 
future. The depths are there and cannot be ignored, and always 
by the side of the loveliness that surrounds us is the misery of the 
world. Man's journey through life is an odd mixture of joy and 
sorrow; thus only can he learn and advance. The travail of the 
soul is a tragic and lonely business. External events and their conse- 
quences affect us powerfully, and yet the greatest shocks come to 
our minds through inner fears and conflicts. While we advance 
on the external plane, as we must if we are to survive, we have 
also to win peace with ourselves and between ourselves and our 
environment, a peace which brings satisfaction not only to our 
physical and material needs but also to those inner imaginative 
urges and adventurous spirits that have distinguished man ever 
since he started on his troubled journey in the realms of thought 
and action. Whether that journey has any ultimate purpose or not 
we do not know, but it has its compensations, and it points to many 
a nearer objective which appears attainable and which may again 
become the starting point for a fresh advance. 

Science has dominated the western world and everyone there 
pays tribute to it, and yet the west is still far from having deve- 
loped the real temper of science. It has still to bring the spirit and 
the flesh into creative harmony. In India in many obvious ways 
we have a greater distance to travel. And yet there may be fewer 

•514 



major obstructions on our way, for the essential basis of Indian 
thought for ages past, though not its later manifestations, fits in 
with the scientific temper and approach, as well as with inter- 
nationalism. It is based on a fearless search for truth, on the soli- 
darity of man, even on the divinity of everything living, and on 
the free and co-operative development of the individual and the 
species, ever to greater freedom and higher stages of human growth. 

The Importance of the National Idea. Changes 
Necessary in India 

A blind reverence for the past is bad and so also is a contempt 
for it, for no future can be founded on either of these. The present 
and the future inevitably grow out of the past and bear its stamp, 
and to forget this is to build without foundations and to cut off the 
roots of national growth. It is to ignore one of the most powerful 
forces that influence people. Nationalism is essentially a group 
memory of past achievements, traditions, and experiences, and 
nationalism is stronger to-day than it has ever been. Many people 
thought that nationalism had had its day and must inevitably 
give place to the ever-growing international tendencies of the 
modern world. Socialism with its proletarian background derided 
national culture as something tied up with a decaying middle 
class. Capitalism itself became progressively international with 
its cartels and combines and overflowed national boundaries. 
Trade and commerce, easy communications and rapid transport, 
the radio and cinema, all helped to create an international atmos- 
phere and to produce the delusion that nationalism was doomed. 
Yet whenever a crisis has arisen nationalism has emerged again 
and dominated the scene, and people have sought comfort and 
strength in their old traditions. One of the remarkable develop- 
ments of the present age has been the rediscovery of the past and 
of the nation. This going back to national traditions has been 
most marked in the ranks of labour and the proletarian elements, 
who were supposed to be the foremost champions of international 
action. War or similar crisis dissolves their internationalism and 
they become subject to nationalist hates and fears even more than 
other groups. The most striking example of this is the recent deve- 
lopment of the Soviet Union. Without giving up in any way its 
essential social and economic structure, it has become more natio- 
nalist-minded and the appeal of the fatherland is now much greater 
than the appeal of the international proletariat. Famous figures 
in national history have again been revived and have become 
heroes of the Soviet people. The inspiring record of the Soviet 
people in this war, the strength and unity they have shown, are 
no doubt due to a social and economic structure which has resulted 
in social advances on a wide front, on planned production and 

515 



consumption, on the development of science and its functions, 
and on the release of a vast quantity of new talent and capacity 
for leadership, as also on brilliant leadership. But it may also be 
partly due to a revival of national memories and traditions and 
a new awareness of the past, of which the present was felt to be a 
continuation. It would be wrong to imagine that this nationalist 
outlook of Russia is just a reversion to old-style nationalism. It 
is certainly not that. The tremendous experiences of the revolution 
and all that followed it cannot be forgotten, and the changes 
that resulted from it in social structure and mental adjustment 
must remain. That social structure leads inevitably to a certain 
international outlook. Nevertheless nationalism has reappeared 
in such a way as to fit in with the new environment and add to 
the strength of the people. 

It is instructive to compare the development of the Soviet state 
with the varying fortunes of the Communist Parties in other 
countries. There was the first flush of enthusiasm among many 
people in all countries, and especially in proletarian ranks, soon 
after the Soviet Revolution. Out of this grew communist groups 
and parties. Then conflicts arose between these groups and natio- 
nal labour parties. During the Soviet five-year plans there was 
another wave of interest and enthusiasm, and this probably 
affected middle-class intellectuals even more than Labour. Again 
there was a reaction at the time of the purges in the Soviet Union. 
In some countries Communist Praties were suppressed, in others 
they made progress. But almost everywhere they came into con- 
flict with organized national Labour. Partly this was due to the 
conservatism of Labour, but more so to a feeling that the Com- 
munist Party represented a foreign group and that they took their 
policies from Russia. The inherent nationalism of Labour came 
in the way of its accepting the co-operation of the Communist 
Party even when many were favourably inclined towards com- 
munism. The many changes in Soviet policy, which could be 
understood in relation to Russia, became totally incomprehensible 
as policies favoured by Communist Parties elsewhere. They could 
only be understood on the basis that what may be good for Russia 
must necessarily be good for the rest of the world. These Com- 
munist Parties, though they consisted of some able and very earnest 
men and women, lost contact with the nationalist sentiments of 
the people and weakened accordingly. While the Soviet Union 
was forging new links with national tradition, the Communist 
Parties of other countries were drifting further away from it. 

I cannot speak with much knowledge of what happened else- 
where, but I know that in India the Communist Party is com- 
pletely divorced from, and is ignorant of, the national traditions 
that fill the minds of the people. It believes that communism 
necessarily implies a contempt for the past. So far as it is con- 

516 



cerned, the history of the world began in November, 1917, and 
everything that preceded this was preparatory and leading up 
to it. Normally speaking, in a country like India with large num- 
bers of people on the verge of starvation and the economic structure 
cracking up, communism should have a wide appeal. In a sense 
there is that vague appeal, but the Communist Party cannot 
take advantage of it because it has cut itself off from the springs 
of national sentiment and speaks in a language which finds no 
echo in the hearts of the people. It remains an energetic, but small 
group, with no real roots. 

It is not only the Communist Party in India that has failed 
in this respect. There are others who talk glibly of modernism 
and modern spirit and the essence of western culture, and are 
at the same time ignorant of their own culture. Unlike the com- 
munists, they have no ideal that moves them and no driving force 
that carries them forward. They take the external forms and outer 
trappings of the west (and often some of the less desirable features), 
and imagine that they are in the vanguard of an advancing civi- 
lization. Naive and shallow and yet full of their own conceits, they 
live, chiefly in a few large cities, an artificial life which has no 
living contacts with the culture of the east or of the west. 

National progress can, therefore, neither lie in a repetition of 
the past nor in its denial. New patterns must inevitably be adopted 
but they must be integrated with the old. Sometimes the new, though 
very different, appears in terms of pre-existing patterns, and thus 
creates a feeling of a continuous development from the past, a link 
in the long chain of the history of the race. Indian history is a 
striking record of changes introduced in this way, a continuous 
adaptation of old ideas to a changing environment, of old patterns 
to new. Because of this there is no sense of cultural break in it and 
there is that continuity, in spite of repeated change, from the far 
distant days of Mohenjodaro to our own age. There was a reverence 
for the past and for traditional forms, but there was also a freedom 
and flexibility of the mind and a tolerance of the spirit. So while 
forms often remained, the inner content continued to change. 
In no other way could that society have survived for thousands of 
years. Only a living and growing mind could overcome the rigidity 
of traditional forms, only those forms could give it continuity and 
stability. 

Yet this balance may become precarious and one aspect may 
overshadow, and to some extent, suppress A this other. In India 
there was an extraordinary freedom of the mind allied to certain 
rigid social forms. These forms ultimately influenced the freedom 
of the mind and made it in practice, if not in theory, more rigid 
and limited. In western Europe there was no such freedom of the 
mind and there was also much less rigidity in social forms. Europe 
had a long struggle for the freedom of the mind and, as a 

517 



consequence, social forms also changed. 

In China the flexibility of the mind was even greater than in 
India and for all her love of, and attachment to, tradition, that 
mind never lost its flexibility and essential tolerance. Tradition 
sometimes delayed changes but that mind was not afraid of 
change, though it retained the old patterns. Even more than in 
India, Chinese society built up a balance and an equilibrium 
which survived through many changes for thousands of years. 
Perhaps one of the great advantages that China has had over 
other countries is her entire freedom from dogma, from the nar- 
row and limited religious outlook, and her reliance on reason and 
common sense. No other country has based its culture less on 
religion and more on morality and ethics and a deep under- 
standing of the variety of human life. 

In India, because of the recognized freedom of the mind, 
howsoever limited in practice, new ideas are not shut out. They 
are considered and can be accepted far more than in countries 
which have a more rigid and dogmatic outlook on life. The 
essential ideals of Indian culture are broad-based and can be 
adapted to almost any environment. The bitter conflict between 
science and religion which shook up Europe in the nineteenth 
century would have no reality in India, nor would change based 
on the applications of science bring any conflict with those ideals. 
Undoubtedly such changes would stir up, as they are stirring up, 
the mind of India, but instead of combating them or rejecting 
them it would rationalize them from its own ideological point of 
view and fit them into its mental framework. It is probable that 
in this process many vital changes may be introduced in the old 
outlook, but they will not be super-imposed from outside and 
will seem rather to grow naturally from the cultural background 
of the people. This is more difficult to-day than it might have 
been, because of the long period of arrested growth and the urgent 
necessity for big and qualitative changes. 

Conflict, however, there will be, with much of the superstruc- 
ture that has grown up round those basic ideals and which exist 
and stifles us to-day. That superstructure will inevitably have 
to go, because much of it is bad in itself and is contrary to the 
spirit of the age. Those who seek to retain it do an ill service to 
the basic ideals of Indian culture, for they mix up the good and 
the bad and thus endanger the former. It is no easy matter to 
separate the two or draw a hard and fast line between them, and 
here opinions will differ widely. But it is not necessary to draw 
any such theoretical and logical line; the logic of changing life 
and the march of events will gradually draw that line for us. Every 
kind of development — technological or philosophical — neces- 
sitates contact with life itself, with social needs, with the living 

518 



movements of the world. Lack of this contact leads to stagnation 
and loss of vitality and creativeness. But if we maintain these 
contacts and are receptive to them, we shall adapt ourselves to the 
curve of life without losing the essential characteristic which we 
have valued. 

Our approach to knowledge in the past was a synthetic one, 
but limited to India. That limitation continued and the syn- 
thetic approach gave place gradually to a more analytical one. 
We have now to lay greater stress on the synthetic aspect and make 
the whole world our field of study. This emphasis on synthesis is 
indeed necessary for every nation and individual if they are to grow 
out of the narrow grooves of thought and action in which most 
people have lived for so long. The development of science and its 
applications have made this possible for us, and yet the very excess 
of new knowledge has added to its difficulty. Specialization has 
led to a narrowing of individual life in a particular groove, and 
man's labour in industry is often confined to some infinitesimal part 
of the whole product. Specialization in knowledge and work will 
have to continue, but it seems more essential than ever that a 
synthetic view of human life and man's adventure through the 
ages should be encouraged. This view will have to take into 
consideration the past and the present, and include in its scope 
all countries and peoples. In this way perhaps we might develop, 
in addition to our own national backgrounds and cultures, an 
appreciation of others and a capacity to understand and co-operate 
with the peoples of other countries. Thus also we might succeed 
to some extent in building up integrated personalities instead of 
the lop-sided* individuals of to-day. We might become, in Plato's 
words, 'spectators of all time and all being,' drawing sustenance 
from the rich treasures that humanity has accumulated, adding 
to them, and applying them in building for the future. 

It is a curious and significant act that, in spite of all modern 
scientific progress and talk of internationalism, racialism and 
other separating factors are at least as much in evidence to-day, 
if not more so, than at any previous time in history. There is 
something lacking in all this progress, which can neither pro- 
duce harmony between nations nor within the spirit of man. 
Perhaps more synthesis and a little humility towards the wisdom 
of the past, which, after all, is the accumulated experience of 
the human race, would help us to gain a new perspective and 
greater harmony. That is especially needed by those peoples who 
live a fevered life in the present only and have almost forgotten 
the past. But for countries like India a different emphasis is 
necessary, for we have too much of the past about us and have 
ignored the present. We have to get rid of that narrowing religious 
outlook, that obsession with the supernatural and metaphysical 
speculations, that loosening of the mind's discipline in religious 

519 



ceremonial and mystical emotionalism, which come in the way 
of our understanding ourselves and the world. We have to come 
to grips with the present, this life, this world, this nature which 
surrounds us in its infinite variety. Some Hindus talk of going 
back to the Vedas; some Moslems dream of an Islamic theocracy. 
Idle fancies, for there is no going back to the past; there is no 
turning back even if this was thought desirable. There is only 
one-way traffic in Time. 

India must therefore lessen her religiosity and turn to science. 
She must get rid of the exclusiveness in thought and social habit 
which has become life a prison to her, stunting her spirit and 
preventing growth. The idea of ceremonial purity has erected 
barriers against social intercourse and narrowed the sphere of 
social action. The day-to-day religion of the orthodox Hindu 
is more concerned with what to eat and what not to eat, who to 
eat with and from whom to keep away, than with spiritual values. 
The rules and regulations of the kitchen dominate his social life. 
The Moslem is fortunately free from these inhibitions, but he has 
his own narrow codes and ceremonials, a routine which he 
rigorously follows, forgetting the lesson of brotherhood which 
his religion taught him. His view of life is, perhaps, even more 
limited and sterile than the Hindu view, though the average Hindu 
to-day is a poor representative of the latter view, for he has lost 
that traditional freedom of thought and the background that 
enriches life in many ways. 

Caste is the symbol and embodiment of this exclusiveness 
among the Hindus. It is sometimes said that the basic idea of 
caste might remain, but its subsequent harmful development 
and ramifications should go; that it should not depend on birth 
but on merit. This approach is irrelevant and merely confuses the 
issue. In a historical context a study of the growth of caste has 
some value, but we cannot obviously go back to the period when 
caste began; in the social organization of to-day it has no place 
left. If merit is the only criterion and opportunity is thrown open 
to everybody, then caste loses all its present-day distinguishing 
features and, in fact, ends. Caste has in the past not only led to the 
suppression of certain groups, but to a separation of theoretical 
and scholastic learning from craftsmanship, and a divorce of 
philosophy from actual life and its problems. It was an aristocratic 
approach based on traditionalism. This outlook has to change 
completely, for it is wholly opposed to modern conditions and the 
democratic ideal. The functional organization of social groups 
in India may continue, but even that will undergo a vast change 
as the nature of modern industry creates new functions and puts 
an end to many old ones. The tendency to-day everywhere is 
towards a functional organization of society, and the concept of 

520 



abstract rights is giving place to that of functions. This is in har- 
mony with the old Indian ideal. 

The spirit of the age is in favour of equality, though practice 
denies it almost everywhere. We have got rid of slavery in the 
narrow sense of the word, that a man can be the property of ano- 
ther. But a new slavery, in some ways worse than the old, has 
taken its place all over the world. In the name of individual free- 
dom, political and economic systems exploit human beings and 
treat them as commodities. And again, though an individual 
cannot be the property of another, a country and a nation can 
still be the property of another nation, and thus group slavery is 
tolerated. Racialism also is a distinguishing feature of our times, 
and we have not only master nations but also master races. 

Yet the spirit of the age will triumph. In India, at any rate, 
we must aim at equality. That does not and cannot mean that 
everybody is physically or intellectually or spiritually equal or 
can be made so. But it does mean equal opportunities for all and 
no political, economic, or social barrier in the way of any indi- 
vidual or group. It means a faith in humanity and a belief that 
there is no race or group that cannot advance and make good in 
its own way, given the chance to do so. It means a realization of 
the fact that the backwardness or degradation of any group is not 
due to inherent failings in it, but principally to lack of opportu- 
nities and long suppression by other groups. It should mean an 
understanding of the modern world wherein real progress and 
advance, whether national or international, have become very 
much a joint affair and a backward group pulls back others. There- 
fore, not only must equal opportunities be given to all, but special 
opportunities for educational, economic and cultural growth 
must be given to backward groups so as to enable them to catch 
up to those who are ahead of them. Any such attempt to open the 
doors of opportunity to all in India will release enormous energy 
and ability and transform the country with amazing speed. 

If the spirit of the age demands equality, it must necessarily 
also demand an economic system which fits in with it and en- 
courages it. The present colonial system in India is the very anti- 
thesis of it. Absolutism is not only based on inequality but must 
perpetuate it in every sphere of life. It suppresses the creative and 
regenerative forces of a nation, bottles up talent and capacity, 
and discourages the spirit of responsibility. Those who-have to 
suffer under it, lose their sense of dignity and self-reliance. The 
problems of India, complicated as they seem, are essentially due 
to an attempt to advance while preserving the political and eco- 
nomic structure more or less intact. Political advance is made 
subject to the preservation of this structure and existing vested 
interests. The two are incompatible. 

521 



Political change there must be, but economic change is equally 
necessary. That change will have to be in the direction of a demo- 
cratically planned collectivism. 'The choice,' says R. H. Tawney, 
'is not between competition and monopoly, but between mono- 
poly which is irresponsible and private and a monopoly which 
is responsible and public' Public monopolies are growing even 
in capitalist states and they will continue to grow. The conflict 
between the idea underlying them and private monopoly will 
continue till the latter is liquidated. A democratic collectivism 
need not mean an abolition of private property, but it will mean 
the public ownership of the basic and major industries. It will mean 
the co-operative or collective control of the land. In India especi- 
ally it will be necessary to have, in addition to the big industries, 
co-operatively controlled small and village industries. Such a system 
of democratic collectivism will need careful and continuous plan- 
ning and adaptation to the changing needs of the people. The 
aim should be the expansion of the productive capacity of the 
nation in every possible way, at the same time absorbing all the 
labour power of the nation in some activity or other and prevent- 
ing unemployment. As far as possible there should be freedom to 
choose one's occupation. An equalization of income will not result 
from all this, but there will be far more equitable sharing and a 
progressive tendency towards equalization. In any event, the vast 
differences that exist to-day will disappear completely, and class 
distinctions, which are essentially based on differences in income, 
will begin to fade out. 

Such a change would mean an upsetting of the present-day 
acquisitive society based primarily on the profit motive. The profit 
motive may still continue to some extent but it will not be the 
dominating urge, nor will it have the same scope as it has to-day. 
It would be absurd to say that the profit motive does not appeal 
to the average Indian, but it is nevertheless true that there is no 
such admiration for it in India as there is in the west. The pos- 
sessor of money may be envied but he is not particularly respected 
or admired. Respect and admiration still go to the man or woman 
who is considered good and wise, and especially to those who 
sacrifice themselves or what they possess for the public good. The 
Indian outlook, even of the masses, has never approved of the 
spirit of acquisitiveness. 

Collectivism involves communal undertakings and co-operative 
effort. This again is fully in harmony with old Indian social con- 
ceptions which were all based on the idea of the group. The decay 
of the group system under British rule, and especially ofthe self- 
governing village, has caused deep injury to the Indian masses, 
even more psychological than economic. Nothing positive came 
in its place, and they lost their spirit of independence, their 

522 



sense of responsibility, and their capacity to co-operate together 
for common purposes. The village, which used to be an organic 
and vital unit, became progressively a derelict area, just a collec- 
tion of mud huts and odd individuals. But still the village holds 
together by some invisible link and old memories revive. It should 
be easily possible to take advantage of these age-long traditions and 
to build up communal and co-operative concerns in the land and 
in small industry. The village can no longer be a self-contained 
economic unit (though it may often be intimately connected with 
a collective or co-operative farm), but it can very well be a govern- 
mental and electoral unit, each such unit functioning as a self- 
governing community within the larger political framework, and 
looking after the essential needs of the village. If it is treated to 
some extent as an electoral unit, this will simplify provincial and 
all-India elections considerably by reducing the number of direct 
electors. The village council, itself chosen by all the adult men 
and women of the village, could form these electors for the bigger 
elections. Indirect elections may have some disadvantages but, 
having regard to the background in India, I feel sure that the 
village should be treated as a unit. This will give a truer and more 
responsible representation. 

In addition to this territorial representation, there should also 
be direct representation of the collectives and co-operatives on 
the land and in industry. Thus the democratic organization of 
the state will consist of both functional and territorial repre- 
sentatives, and will be based on local autonomy. Some such 
arrangement will be completely in harmony with India's past 
as well as with her present requirements. There will be no sense 
of break (except with the conditions created by British rule) 
and the mass mind will accept it as a continuation of the past 
which it still remembers and cherishes. 

Such a development in India would be in tune with political 
and economic internationalism. It would breed no conflicts with 
other nations and would be a powerful factor for peace in Asia 
amd the world. It would help in the realization of that one 
world towards which we are inevitably being driven, even 
though our passions delude us and our minds fail to understand 
it. The Indian people, freed from the terrible sense of oppression 
and frustration, will grow in stature again and lose their narrow 
nationalism and exclusiveness. Proud of their Indian heritage, 
they will open their minds and hearts to other peoples and other 
nations, and become citizens of this wide and fascinating world, 
marching onwards with others in that ancient quest in which 
their forefathers were the pioneers. 



523 



India: Partition or Strong National State or 
Centre of Supra-National State? 

It is difficult to discover a just balance between one's hopes and 
fears or to prevent one's wishes colouring the thinking of on#'s 
mind. Our desires seek out supporting reasons and tend to 
ignore facts and arguments that do not fit in with them. I try 
to reach that balance so that I may be able to judge correctly 
and find out the true basis for action, and yet I know how far 
I am from success and how I cannot get rid of the multitude 
of thoughts and feelings which have gone to build me up and 
to fence me in with their invisible bars. So also others may err 
in different directions. An Indian's and an Englishman's view 
of India and her place in the world will inevitably diverge and 
differ, conditional as each is on a different individual and 
national past. The individual and the national group fashion 
their own destiny by their actions; these past actions lead to the 
present and what they do to-day forms the basis of their to- 
morrows. Karma, they have called this in India, the law of cause 
and effect, the destiny which our past activities create for us. 
It is not an invariable destiny and many other factors go to 
influence it, and the individual's will is itself supposed to have 
some play. If this freedom to vary the results of past action were 
not present, then indeed we would all be mere robots in the iron 
grip of an unavoidable fate. Yet that past Karma is a powerful 
factor in shaping the individual and the nation, and nationalism 
itself is a shadow of it with all its good and bad memories of 
the past. 

Perhaps, this past inheritance influences the national group 
even more than the individual, for large numbers of human 
beirgs are driven more by unconscious and impersonal urges 
than the individual, and it is more difficult to divert them from 
their course. Moral considerations may influence an individual 
but their effect on a group is far less, and the larger the group 
the less is their effect on it. And it is easier, especially in the 
modern world, to influence the group by insidious propaganda. 
And yet sometimes, though rarely, the group itself rises to a 
height of moral behaviour, forcing the individual to forget his 
narrow and selfish ways. More often the group falls far below 
the individual standard. 

War produces both these reactions, but the dominant ten- 
dency is a release from moral responsibility and the collapse of 
the standards that civilization has so laboriously built up. Suc- 
cessful war and aggression lead to a justification and continuance 
of this policy, to imperialist domination and ideas of a master 
race. Defeat results in frustration and the nursing of feelings of 

524 



revenge. In either event, hatred and the habit of violence grow. 
There is ruthlessness and brutality, and a refusal even to try 
to understand the other's viewpoint. And thus the future is condi- 
tioned and more wars and conflicts follow with all their attendant 
consequences. 

The last 200 years of enforced relationship between India and 
England have built up this Karma, this destiny, for both of them, 
and it continues to govern their relations to each other. Entangled 
in its meshes, we have thus far struggled in vain to rid ourselves 
of this past inheritance and start afresh on a different basis. The 
last five years of war have unhappily added to that past evil Karma 
and made reconciliation and a normal relationship more difficult. 
That record of 200 years, like all else, is a mixture of good and 
evil. To the Englishman the good outweighs the evil, to the 
Indian the evil is so overwhelming that it darkens the whole period. 
But whatever the balance of good and evil there might be, it is 
obvious that any relationship that is enforced produces hatred and 
a bitter dislike of each other, and out of these feelings only evil 
consequences can flow. 

A revolutionary change, both political and economic, is not 
only needed in India but would appear to be inevitable. At the 
end of 1939, soon after the war started, and again in April, 
1942, there seemed to be a faint possibility of such a change 
taking place by consent between India and England. But those 
possibilities and opportunities passed because every basic change 
was feared. But the change will come. Has the stage of consent 
passed? In the presence of common perils the past loses some 
of its obsessions and the present is viewed in terms of the future. 
Now the past has returned and has been grievously added to. 
The receptive mood has changed and become hard and bitter. 
Some settlement will come sooner or later, after more conflict 
or without it, but it is far less likely to be real, sincere, and 
co-operative. More probably it will be an unwilling submission 
on both sides to overriding circumstances with continuing ill- 
will and distrust. No attempted solution which assumes even in 
principle the retention of India as part of the British empire 
has the slightest chance of acceptance of adoption. No solution 
which retains feudal relics in India can possibly last. 

Life is cheap in India and when this is so, life is empty and 
ugly and shoddy and all the horrid brood of poverty envelop 
it. There is an enervating atmosphere in India, due to many 
causes, imposed or inherent, but essentially the resultant of 
poverty and want. We have a terribly low standard of living 
and a very high rate of dying. Industrially developed and rich 
countries have a way of looking at undeveloped and poor coun- 
tries just as the rich man looks on the poor and unfortunate. 

525 



The rich man, out of his abundant resources and opportunities, 
develops high standards and fastidious tastes and blames the 
poor for their habits and lack of culture. Having denied them 
the opportunity to better themselves, he makes their poverty 
and its attendant evils justifications for a further denial. 

India is not a poor country. She is abundantly supplied with 
everything that makes a country rich, and yet her people are 
very poor. She has a noble heritage of culture-forms and her 
culture-potential is very great; but many new developments and 
the accessories of culture are lacking. This lack is due to many 
causes and largely to deliberate deprivation. When this is so, 
the vital energy of the people must overcome the obstacles in 
the way and fill the lack. That is happening in India to-day. 
Nothing can be clearer than the fact that India has the resources 
as well as the intelligence, skill, and capacity to advance rapidly. 
She has the accumulated cultural and spiritual experience of 
ages behind her. She can progress both in scientific theory and 
the applications of science and become a great industrial nation. 
Her scientific record is already noteworthy, in spite of the many 
limitations she suffers from and the lack of opportunity for her 
young men and women to do scientific work. That record is not 
great considering the size and possibilities of the country, but 
it is significant of what will happen when the energies of the 
nation are released ond opportunities are provided. 

Only two factors may come in the way: international deve- 
lopments and external pressure on India, and lack of a common 
objective within the country. Ultimately it is the latter alone 
that will count. If India is split up into two or more parts and 
can no longer function as a political and economic unit, her 
progress will be seriously affected. There will be the direct 
weakening effect, but much worse will be the inner psychologi- 
cal conflict between those who wish to reunite her and those 
who oppose this. New vested interests will be created which 
will resist change and progress, a new evil Karma will pursue 
us in the future. One wrong step leads to another; so it has 
been in the past and so it may be in the future. And yet wrong 
steps have to be taken sometimes lest some worse peril befall 
us; that is the great paradox of politics, and no man can say 
with surety whether present wrong-doing is better and safer in 
the end than the possibility of that imagined peril. Unity is 
always better than disunity, but an enforced unity is a sham 
and dangerous affair, full of explosive possibilities. Unity must 
be of the mind and heart, a sense of belonging together and of 
facing together those who attack it. I am convinced that there 
is that basic unity in India, but it has been overlaid and hidden 
to some extent by other forces. These latter may be temporary 

526 



and artificial and may pass off, but they count to-day and no 
man can ignore them. 

It is our fault, of course, and we must suffer for our failings. 
But I cannot excuse or forgive the British authorities for the 
deliberate part they have played in creating disruption in India. 
All other injuries will pass, but this will continue to plague 
us for a much longer period. Often I am reminded of Ireland 
and China when I think of India. Both differ from India and 
from each other in their past and present problems, and yet 
there are many similarities. Shall we have to tread that same 
path in the future? 

Jim Phelan in his 'Jail Journey' tells us of the effect of jail 
on human character, and everyone who has spent a long time 
in prison knows how true his statement is: The jail. ..acts as 
a magnifying glass on human character. Every tiny weakness is 
brought out, emphasized, wakened, until presently there is no 
more of the convict with the weakness but only a weakness 
wearing convict clothes.' Some such effect is produced on 
national character by foreign rule. That is not the only effect, 
for noble qualities also develop and strength is gradually built 
up through resistance. But foreign authority encourages the 
former and tries to suppress the latter. Just as we have convict 
warders in prison whose chief qualification is to spy on their 
fellow-convicts, so in a subject country there is no lack of puppets 
and sycophants who put on the livery of authority and act on 
its behalf. There are others also who do not consciously line up 
in this way but who are nevertheless influenced by the policies 
and intrigues of the dominant power. 

To accept the principle of a division of India, or rather the 
principle that there should be no enforced unity, may lead to a 
calm and dispassionate consideration of its consequences and 
thus to a realization that unity is in the interest of all. Yet 
obviously there is the danger that once this wrong step is taken, 
other like ones may follow in its train. The attempt to solve 
one problem in the wrong way may well create new problems. 
If India is to be divided into two or more parts, then the amal- 
gamation of the major Indian states into India becomes more 
difficult, for those states wili find an additional reason, which 
they might not otherwise have, for keeping aloof and holding 
on to their authoritarian regimes.* 

*// may be said that the Indian Stales as a whole, while anxious to maintain their internal 
autonomy, are equally desirous of having a strongfederal India of which they are members 
with equal rights. The proposal to divide India has been vigorously opposed by some of the 
leading ministers and statesmen of the states, and they have made it clear that, if such a division 
lakes place, the states might well prefer to keep to themselves and not tie up with either part of 
divided India. SirC. P. Ramaswami Aiyar, the Dewan of Travancore and one of the ablest 
and most experienced of states' ministers (though with a reputationfor autocratic methods and 

527 



Any division of India on a religious basis as between Hindus 
and Moslems, as envisaged by the Moslem League to-day, can- 
not separate the followers of these two principal religions of 
India, for they are spread out all over the country. Even if the 
areas in which each group is in a majority are separated, huge 
minorities belonging to the other group remain in each area. 
Thus instead of solving the minority problem, we create several 
in place of one. Other religious groups, like the Sikhs, are split 
up unfairly against their will and placed in two different states. 
In giving freedom to separate to one group, other groups, though 
in a minority, are denied that freedom and compelled to isolate 
themselves from the rest of India against their emphatic and 
deeply felt wishes. If it is said that the majority (religious) must 
prevail in each area, so far as the question of separation is 
concerned, there is no particular reason why the majority view 
should not decide the question for the whole of India. Or that 
each tiny area should not decide its independent status for itself 
and thus create a vast number of small states — an incredible 
and fantastic development. Even so it cannot be done with any 
logic, for religious groups are intermingled and overlap in the 
population all over the country. 

It is difficult enough to solve such problems by separation 

a suppression of those of whom he does not approve) is a strong advocate of the internal 
autonomy of the states. He is at the same time an aggressive and persistent opponent of 
'Pakistan', or any other suggested division. In an address delivered on October 6th, 1944, 
before the Bombay branch of the Indian Council of World Affairs, he said: 'The states, in 
other words, should, and in my view would, come into a scheme whereby the various political 
and administrative units in India, while exercising a full measure of autonomy in local 
matters, would co-operate with other units in the composition and working of the central 
legislative and executive organizations. Such organizations will function effectively within 
and without the limits of India as national and co-ordinating as well as representative bodies. 
Within the limits of India the relationship between the units will be one of equality and 
there will be no question of paramountcy as such inter se, though the rights residual and 
otherwise of the centre will have to be firmly established and implemented.' He further says: 
'My point is this, namely, that treaty rights or no treaty rights, no Indian state has a right 
to exist which does not come into any scheme by which there is created a central direction or 
central control of matters that appertain to the Indian states and British India alike, or which 
does not loyally conform to all political arrangements that may be arrived at for the 
governance of India and all ideologies that may be evolved as the result offree and equal 
discussion and resultant compromises.' '/wish to emphasize strongly, though I know I shjll 
evoke a certain amount of controversy, that no Indian state has the rigth to exist unless it is 
abreast of, if not ahead of, British India in the things that matter in relation to the well-being 
of the people'. 

Another fact that Ramaswami Aiyar emphasizes is that there is no getting away from 
the fact that it is impossible to deal with 601 states on an equal footing. He thinks that in a 
new constitution for India these 601 states will have to be reduced to something like fifteen 
or twenty, the others being absorbed into the larger units, province or state. 

Ramaswami Aiyar apparently does not attach very much importance to this internal political 
progress of the states, or at any rate considers this a secondary matter. Tet the lack of this, 
especially in the states otherwise advanced, inevitably leads to ceaseless conflict between the 
people and the state authorities. 

528 



where nationalities are concerned. But where the test becomes 

a religious one it becomes impossible of solution on any logical 
basis. It is a reversion to some medieval conception which cannot 
be fitted into the modern world. 

If the economic aspects of separation are considered it is clear 
that India as a whole is a strong and more-or-less self-sufficient 
economic unit. Any division will naturally weaken her and one 
part will have to depend on the other. If the division is made 
so as to separate the predominantly Hindu and Moslem areas, 
the former will comprise far the greater part of the mineral 
resources and industrial areas. The Hindu areas will not be so 
hard hit from this point of view. The Moslem areas, on the 
other hand, will be the economically backward, and often deficit, 
areas which cannot exist without a great deal of outside assist- 
ance. Thus the odd fact emerges that those who to-day demand 
separation will be the greatest sufferers from it. Because of a 
partial realization of this fact, it is now stated on their behalf 
that separation should take place in such a way as to give them 
an economically balanced region. Whether this is possible under 
any circumstances I do not know, but I rather doubt it. In any 
event any such attempt means forcibly attaching other large 
areas with a predominantly Hindu and Sikh population to the 
separated area. That would be a curious way of giving effect 
to the principle of self-determination. I am reminded of the 
story of the man who killed his father and mother and then 
threw himself on the mercy of the court as an orphan. 

Another very curious contradiction emerges. While the prin- 
ciple of self-determination is invoked, the idea of a plebiscite 
to decide this is not accepted, or at most, it is said that the 
plebiscite should be limited to Moslems only in the area. Thus 
in Bengal and the Punjab the Moslem population is about 54 
per cent or less. It is suggested that if there is to be voting only 
this 54 per cent should vote and decide the fate of the remaining 
46 per cent or more, who will have no say in the matter. This 
might result in 28 per cent deciding the fate of the remaining 72 
per cent. 

It is difficult to understand how any reasonable person can 
advance these propositions or expect them to be agreed to. I do 
not know, and nobody can know till an actual vote takes place 
on this issue, how many Moslems in the areas concerned would 
vote for partition. I imagine that a large number of them, 
possibly even a majority, would vote against it. Many Moslem 
organizations are opposed to it. Every non-Moslem, whether he 
is a Hindu, or Sikh, or Christian, or Parsee, is opposed to it. 
Essentially this sentiment in favour of partition has grown in 
the areas where Moslems are in a small minority — areas which. 

529 



in any event, would remain undetached from the rest of India. 
Moslems in provinces where they are in a majority have been 
less influenced by it; naturally, for they can stand on their own 
feet and have no reason to fear other groups. It is least in 
evidence in the North-West Frontier Province (95 per cent 
Moslem), where the Pathans are brave and self-reliant and have 
no fear complex. Thus, oddly enough, the Moslem League's pro- 
posal to partition India finds far less response in the Moslem 
areas sought to be partitioned than in the Moslem minority areas 
which are unaffected by it. Yet the fact remains that consider- 
able numbers of Moslems have become sentimentally attached 
to this idea of separation without giving thought to its conse- 
quences. Indeed, the proposition has so far only been vaguely 
stated and no attempt has been made to define it, in spite of 
repeated requests. 

I think this sentiment has been artificially created and has no 
roots in the Moslem mind. But even a temporary sentiment 
may be strong enough to influence events and create a new 
situation. Normally, adjustments would take place from time 
to time, but in the peculiar position in which India is situated 
to-day, with power concentrated in foreign hands, anything may 
happen. It is clear that any real settlement must be based on 
the goodwill of the constituent elements and on the desire of all 
parties to it to co-operate together for a common objective. In 
order to gain that any sacrifice in reason is worth while. Every 
group must not only be theoretically and actually free and have 
equal opportunities of growth, but should have the sensation 
of freedom and equality. It is not difficult, if passions and un- 
reasoning emotions are set aside, to devise such freedom with 
the largest autonomy for provinces and states and yet a strong 
central bond. There could even be autonomous units within the 
larger provinces or states, as in Soviet Russia. In addition to 
this, every conceivable protection and safeguard for minority 
rights could be inserted into the constitution. 

All this can be done, and yet I do not know how the future 
will take shape under the influence of various indeterminate 
factors and forces, the chief of these being British policy. It 
may be that some division of India is enforced, with some 
tenuous bond joining the divided parts. Even if this happens, I 
am convinced that the basic feeling of unity and world develop- 
ments will later bring the divided parts nearer to each other 
and result in a real unity. 

That unity is geographical, historical, and cultural, and all 
that; but the most powerful factor in its favour is the trend of 
world events. Many of us are of opinion that India is essentially 
a nation; Mr. Jinnah has advanced a two-nation theory and has 

530 



lately added to it and to political phraseology by describing 

some religious groups as sub-nations, whatever these might be. 
His thought identifies a nation with religion. That is not the 
usual approach to-day. But whether India is properly to be 
described as one nation or two or more really does not matter, 
for the modern idea of nationality has been almost divorced 
from statehood. The national state is too small a unit to-day 
and small states can have no independent existence. It is doubt- 
ful if even many of the larger national states can have any real 
independence. The national state is thus giving place to the 
multi-national state or to large federations. The Soviet Union 
is typical of this development. The United States of America, 
though bound together by strong national ties, constitute essen- 
tially a multi-national state. Behind Hitler's march across Europe 
there was something more than the nazi lust for conquest. New 
forces were working towards the liquidation of the small states 
system in Europe. Hitler's armies are now rapidly rolling back 
or are being destroyed, but the conception of large federations 
remains. 

Mr. H. G. Wells has been telling the world, with all the fire 
of an old prophet, that humanity is at the end of an age — an 
age of fragmentation in the management of its affairs, fragmen- 
tation politically among separate sovereign states and economi- 
cally among unrestricted business organizations competing for 
profit. He tells us that it is the system of nationalist indivi- 
dualism and unco-ordinated enterprise that is the world's disease. 
We shall have to put an end to the national state and devise a 
collectivism which neither degrades nor enslaves. The prophets 
are ignored and sometimes even stoned by their generation. And 
so Mr. Wells' warnings, and those of many others, are voices in 
the wilderness so far as those in authority are concerned. Never- 
theless, they point to inevitable trends. These trends can be 
hastened or delayed, or if those who have power are so blind, 
may even have to wait another and greater disaster before they 
take actual shape. 

In India, as elsewhere, we are too much under the bondage 
of slogans and set phrases derived from past events, and ideolo- 
gies which have little relevance to-day, and their chief function 
is to prevent reasoned thought and a dispassionate consideration 
of the situation as it exists. There is also the tendency towards 
abstractions and vague ideals, which arouse emotional responses 
and are often good in their way, but which also lead to a woolliness 
of the mind and unreality. In recent years a great deal has been 
written and said on the future of India, and especially on the 
partition or unity of India; and yet the astonishing fact remains 
that those who propose 'Pakistan' or partition have consistently 

531 



refused to define what they mean or to consider the implications 
of such a division. They move on the emotional plane only, as 
also many of those who oppose them, a plane of imagination and 
vague desire, behind which lie imagined interests. Inevitably, 
between these two emotional and imaginative approaches there is 
no meeting ground. And so 'Pakistan' and 'Akhand Hindustan' 
(undivided India) are bandied about and hurled at each other. 
It is clear that group emotions and conscious or subconscious urges 
count and must be attended to. It is at least equally clear that 
facts and realities do not vanish by our ignoring them or covering 
them up by a film of emotion; they have a way of emerging at 
awkward moments and in unexpected ways. And decisions taken 
primarily on the basis of emotions, or when emotions are the 
dominating consideration, are likely to be wrong and to lead to 
dangerous developments. 

It is obvious that whatever may be the future of India, and 
even if there is a regular partition, the different parts of India 
will have to co-operate with each other in a hundred different 
ways. Even independent nations have to co-operate with each 
other, much more so must Indian provinces or such parts as 
emerge from a partition, for these stand in an intimate relation- 
ship to each other and must hang together or deteriorate, dis- 
integrate, and lose their freedom. Thus the very first practical 
question is: What are the essential common bonds which must 
bind and cement various parts of India if she is to progress and 
remain free, and which are equally necessary even for the auto- 
nomy and cultural growth of those parts. Defence is an obvious 
and outstanding consideration, and behind that defence lie the 
industries feeding it, transport and communications, and some 
measure at least of economic planning. Customs, currency, and 
exchange also, and the maintenance of the whole of India as 
an internally free-trade area, for any internal tariff barriers 
would be fatal barriers to growth. And so on; there are many 
other matters which would inevitably, both from the point of 
view of the whole and the parts, have to be jointly and centrally 
directed. There is no getting away from it whether we are in 
favour of Pakistan or not, unless we are blind to everything 
except a momentary passion. The vast growth of air services 
to-day has led to the demand for their internationalization, or 
to some form of international control. Whether various coun- 
tries are wise enough to accept this is doubtful, but it is quite 
certain that air developments can only take place in India on 
an all-India basis; it is inconceivable for a partitioned India 
to make progress in regard to them in each part separately. 
This applies glso to many other activities which already tend 

to outgrow even national boundaries. India is big enough as 

t 

532 



a whole to give them scope for development, but not so parti- 
tioned India. 

Thus we arrive at the inevitable and ineluctable conclusion 
that, whether Pakistan comes or not, a number of important 
and basic functions of the state must be exercised on an all- 
India basis if India is to survive as a free state and progress. 
The alternative is stagnation, decay, and disintegration, leading 
to loss of political and economic freedom, both for India as a 
whole and its various separated parts. As has been said by an 
eminent authority: 'The inexorable logic of the age presents 
the country with radically different alternatives: union plus 
independence or disunion plus dependence.' What form the 
union is to take, and whether it is called union or by some 
other name, is not so important, though names have their own 
significance and psychological value. The essential fact is that a 
number of varied activities can only be conducted effectively on 
a joint all-India basis. Probably many of these activities will 
soon be under the control of international bodies. The world 
shrinks and its problems overlap. It takes less than three days 
now to go right across the world by air, from any one place to 
another, and to-morrow, with the development of stratosphere 
navigation, it may take even less time. India must become a 
great world centre of air travel, India will also be linked by rail 
to western Asia and Europe on the one side, and to Burma and 
China on the other. Not far from India, across the Himalayas 
in the north, lies in Soviet Asia one of the highly developed 
industrial areas, with an enormous future potential. India will 
be affected by this and will react in many ways. 

The way of approach, therefore, to the problem of unity or 
Pakistan, is not in the abstract and on the emotional level, but 
practically, and with our eyes on the present-day world. That 
approach leads us to certain obvious conclusions, that a binding 
cement in regard to certain important functions and matters is 
essential for the whole of India. Apart from them there may be 
and should be the fullest freedom to constituent units, and an 
intermediate sphere where there is both joint and separate 
functioning. There may be differences of opinion as to where 
one sphere ends, and the other begins, but such differences, when 
considered on a practical basis, are generally fairly easy of adjust- 
ment. 

But all this must necessarily be based on a spirit of willing 
co-operation, on the absence of a feeling of compulsion, and on 
the sensation of freedom in each unit and individual. Old vested 
interest have to go; it is equally important that no new ones 
are created. Certain proposab, based on metaphysical concep- 
tions of groups and forgetting the individuab who comprise 

533 



them, make one individual politically equal to two or three 
others and thus create new vested interests. Any such arrange- 
ment can only lead to grave dissatisfaction and instability. 

The right of any well-constituted area to secede from the 
Indian federation or union has often been put forward, and the 
argument of the U.S.S.R. advanced in support of it. That argu- 
ment has little application, for conditions there are wholly 
different and the right has little practical value. In the emotional 
atmosphere in India to-day it may be desirable to agree to this 
for the future in order to give that sense of freedom from com- 
pulsion which is so necessary. The Congress has in effect agreed 
to it. But even the exercise of that right involves a pre-consi- 
deration of all those common problems to which reference has 
been made. Also there is grave danger in a possibility of parti- 
tion and division to begin with, for such an attempt might well 
scotch the very beginnings of freedom and the formation of a 
free national state. Insuperable problems will rise and confuse 
all the real issues. Disintegration will be in the air and all 
manner of groups, who are otherwise agreeable to a joint and 
unified existence, will claim separate states for themselves, or 
special privileges which are encroachments on others. The 
problem of the Indian states will become far more difficult of 
solution, and the states system, as it is to-day, will get a new 
lease of life. The social and economic problems will be far 
harder to tackle. Indeed, it is difficult to conceive of any free 
state emerging from such a turmoil, and if something does 
emerge, it will be a pitiful caricature full of contradictions and 
insoluble problems. 

Before any such right of secession is exercised there must be 
a properly constituted, functioning, free India. It may be possible 
then, when external influences have been removed and real 
problems face the country, to consider such questions objectively 
and in a spirit of relative detachment, far removed from the 
emotionalism of to-day, which can only lead to unfortunate con- 
sequences which we may all have to regret later. Thus it may 
be desirable to fix a period, say ten years after the establishment 
of the free Indian state, at the end of which the right to secede 
may be exercised through proper constitutional process and in 
accordance with the clearly expressed will of the inhabitants of 
the area concerned. 

Many of us are utterly weary of present conditions in India 
and are passionately eager to find some way out. Some are even 
prepared to clutch at any straw that floats their way in the vague 
hope that it may afford some momentary relief, some breathing 
space to a system that has long felt strangled and suffocated. 
That is very natural. And yet there is danger in these rather 

534 



hysterical and adventurist approaches to vital problems affecting 
the well-being of hundreds of millions and the future peace of 
the world. We live continually on the verge of disaster in India, 
and indeed the disaster sometimes overwhelms us, as we saw in 
Bengal and elsewhere in India last year. The Bengal famine, 
and all that followed it, were not tragic exceptions due to extra- 
ordinary and unlooked for causes which could not be controlled 
or provided for. They were vivid, frightful pictures of India as 
she is, suffering for generations past from a deep-seated organic 
disease which has eaten into her very vitals. That disease will 
take more and more dangerous and disastrous forms unless we 
divert all our joint energies to its uprooting and cure. A divided 
India, each part trying to help itself and not caring for, or co- 
operating with, the rest, will lead to an aggravation of the disease 
and to sinking into a welter of hopeless, helpless misery. It is 
terribly late already and we have to make up for lost time. 
Must even the lesson of the Bengal famine be lost upon us? 
There are still many people who can think only in terms of 
political percentages, cf weightage, of balancing, of checks, of 
the preservation of privileged groups, of making new groups 
privileged, of preventing others from advancing because they 
themselves are not anxious to, or are incapable of, doing so, of 
vested interests, of avoiding major social and economic changes, 
of holding on to the present picture of India with only super- 
ficial alterations. That way lies supreme folly. 

The problems of the moment seem big and engross our atten- 
tion. And yet, in a longer perspective, they may have no great 
importance and, under the surface of superficial events, more 
vital forces may be at work. Forgetting present problems then 
for a while and looking ahead, India emerges as a strong united 
state, a federation of free units, intimately connected with her 
neighbours and playing an important part in world affairs. She 
is one of the very few countries which have the resources and 
capacity to stand on their own feet. To-day probably the only 
such countries are the United States of America and the Soviet 
Union. Great Britain can only be reckoned as one of these if 
the resources of her empire are added to her own, and even then 
a spread-out and disgruntled empire is a source of weakness. 
China and India are potentially capable of joining that group. 
Each of them is compact and homogeneous and full of natural 
wealth, manpower, and human skill and capacity; indeed India's 
potential industrial resources are probably even more varied 
and extensive than China's, and so also her exportable commo- 
dities which may be required for the imports she needs. No 
other country, taken singly, apart from these four, is actually or 
potentially in such a position. It is possible of course that large 

535 



federations or groups of nations may emerge in Europe or else- 
where and form huge multi-national states. 

The Pacific is likely to take the place of the Atlantic in the 
future as a nerve centre of the world. Though not directly a 
Pacific state, India will inevitably exercise an important in- 
fluence there. India will also develop as the centre of economic 
and political activity in the Indian Ocean area, in south-east 
Asia and right up to the Middle East. Her position gives an 
economic and strategic importance in a part of the world which 
is going to develop rapidly in the future. If there is a regional 
grouping of the countries bordering on the Indian Ocean on 
either side of India — Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, India, Ceylon, Burma, 
Malaya, Siam, Java, etc. — present day minority problems will 
disappear, or at any rate will have to be considered in an entirely 
different context. 

Mr. G. D. H. Cole considers India to be itself a supra-national 
area, and he thinks that in the long run she is destined to be the 
centre of a mighty supra-national state covering the whole of the 
Middle East and lying between a Sino-Japanese Soviet Republic, 
a new state based on Egypt, Arabia, and Turkey, and the Soviet 
Union in the north. All this is pure conjecture and whether any 
such development will ever take place no man can say. For my 
part I have no liking for a division of the world into a few huge 
supra-national areas, unless these are tied together by some strong 
world bond. But if people are foolish enough to avoid world unity 
and some world organization, then these vast supra-national regions, 
each functioning as one huge state but with local autonomy, are 
very likely to take shape. For the small national state is doomed. 
It may survive as a culturally autonomous area but not as an in- 
dependent political unit. 

Whatever happens it will be well for the world if India can make 
her influence felt. For that influence will always be in favour of 
peace and co-operation and against aggression. 

Realism and Geopolitics. World Conquest or World 

Association. 

The U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R 

The war has entered on its final stage in Europe and the nazi 
power collapses before the advancing armies in the east and west. 
Paris, that lovely and gracious city, so tied up with freedom's 
struggle, is itself free again. The problems of peace, more diffi- 
cult than those of war, rise up to trouble men's minds and behind 
them lies the disturbing shadow of the great failure of the years 
that followed World War I. Never again, it is said. So they said 
also in 1918. 

536 



Fifteen years ago, in 1929, Mr. Winston Churchill said: 'It is 
a tale that is told, from which we may draw the knowledge and 
comprehension needed for the future. The disproportion between 
the quarrels of nations and the suffering which fighting out those 
quarrels involves; the poor and barren prizes which reward sub- 
lime endeavour on the battlefield; the fleeting triumph of war; 
the long, slow, rebuilding; the awful risks so hardily run; the 
doom missed by a hair's breadth, by the spin of a coin, by the 
accident of an accident — all this should make the prevention of 
another great war the main preoccupation of mankind.' 

Mr. Churchill should know, for he has played a leading part 
in war and peace, led his country with extraordinary courage at 
a time of distress and peril and, in victory, nursed great ambitions 
on its behalf. After World War I, British armies occupied the whole 
of western Asia from the borders of India across Iran and Iraq 
and Palestine and Syria right up to Constantinople. Mr. Churchill 
saw then a vision of a new middle eastern empire for Britain, but 
fate decided otherwise. What dreams does he cherish now for 
the future? 'War is a strange, alchemist,' so wrote a gallant and 
distinguished colleague of mine, now in prison, 'and in its hidden 
chambers are such forces and powers brewed and distilled that they 
tear down the plans of the victorious and vanquished alike. No 
peace conference at the end of the last war dicided that four mighty 
empires of Europe and Asia should fall into dust — the Russian, 
the German, the Austrian, and the Ottoman. Nor was the Russian, 
the German, the Turkish revolution decreed by Lloyd George, 
Clemenceau, or Wilson.' 

What will the leaders of the victorious nations say when they 
meet together after success in war has crowned their efforts? 
How is the future taking shape in their minds, and how far do they 
agree or differ between themselves? What other reactions will 
there be when the passion of war subsides and people try to return 
to the scarce-remembered ways ofpeace? What of the underground 
resistance movements of Europe and the new forces they have 
released? What will the millions of war-hardened soldiers, return- 
ing home much older in mind and experience, say and do? How 
will they fit into the life which has gone on changing while they 
were away? What will happen to devastated and martyred Europe, 
and what to Asia and Africa? What of the 'overpowering surge 
for freedom of Asia's hundreds of millions,' as Mr. Wendell 
Willkie describes it? What of all this and more? And what, above 
all, of the strange trick that fate so often plays, upsetting the well- 
laid schemes of our leaders? 

As the war has developed and the danger of a possible victory 
of the fascist powers has receded, there has been a progressive 
hardening and a greater conservatism in the leaders of the United 

537 



Nations. The four freedoms and the Atlantic charter, vague as 
they were and limited in scope, have faded into the background, 
and the future has been envisaged more and more as a retention 
of the past. The struggle has taken a purely military shape, of 
physical force against force, and has ceased to be an attack on the 
philosophy of the nazis and fascists. General Franco and petty or 
prospective authoritarian rulers in Europe have been encouraged. 
Mr. Churchill still glories in the conception of empire. George 
Bernard Shaw recently declgred that: 'There is no power in the 
world more completely imbued with the idea of its dominance 
than the British empire. Even the word "empire" sticks in Mr. 
Churchill's throat every time he tries to utter it.'* 

There are many people in England, America and elsewhere 
who want the future to be different from the past and who fear 
that unless this is so, fresh wars and disasters, on a more colossal 
scale, will follow this present war. But those who have power 
and authority do not appear to be much influenced by these 
considerations, or are themselves in the grip of forces beyond 
their control. In England, America, and Russia we revert to the 
old game of power politics on a gigantic scale. That is considered 
realism and practical politics. An American authority on geo- 
politics, Professor N. J. Spykman, has written in a recent book: 
'The statesman who conducts foreign policy can concern himself 
with the values of justice, fairness, and tolerance only to the extent 
that they contribute to, or do not interfere with, the power objective. 
They can be used instrumentally as moraljustification for the power 
quest, but they must be discarded the moment their application 
brings weakness. The search for power is not made for the achieve- 
ment of moral values: moral values are used to facilitate the attain- 
ment of power.'! 

This may not be representative of American thought, but it 
certainly represents a powerful section of it. Mr. Walter Lipp- 

*It is clear thai the British ruling classes do not contemplate the ending of the era of imperia- 
lism; at the most they think in terms of modernizing their system of colonial rule. For them 
the possession of colonies is '« necessity of greatness and wealth.' The London Economist, 
representing influential opinion in Britain, wrote on September 16th, 1944: 'The American 
prejudice against "imperialism" — British, French, or Dutch — has led many of the postwar 
planners to assume that the old sovereignties will not be re-established in south-east Asia and 
that some form of international control, or the transfer of the imperium to local peoples, will 
lake the place of the old authority exercised by the western nations. Since this attitude exists 
and is even backed by the most widely distributed American journals and newspapers, it is 
time that the future intentions of the British, the French, and the Dutch were frankly and 
fully explained. Since none of them has any intention of abandoning its colonial empire, but 
on the contrary regards the restoration of Malaya to the British, the East Indies to the Dutch, 
and French Indo-China to the French as an essential part of the destruction of Japan's co- 
prosperity sphere, it would be inviting the worst sort of misunderstanding, and even accusation 
ofbadfaith, if the three nations allowed any doubt on the matter to continue in the mind 
of their American ally. ' 
t' America's Strategy in World Politics.' 

538 



man's vision of the three or four orbits encompassing the globe 
— the Atlantic community, the Russian, the Chinese, and later 
the Hindu-Moslem in South Asia — is a continuation of power 
politics on a vaster scale, and it is difficult to understand how 
he can see any world peace or co-operation emerging out of it. 
America is a curious mixture of what is considered hard-headed 
realism and a vague idealism and humanitarianism. Which of 
these will be the dominating tendency of the future, or what 
will result from their mixing together? Whatever the mass of the 
people may think, foreign policy remains a preserve for the ex- 
perts in charge of it and they are usually wedded to a continua- 
tion of old traditions and fear any innovations which might 
involve their countries in new risks. Realism of course there must 
be, for no nation can base its domestic or foreign policy on mere 
good-will and flights of the imagination. But it is a curious realism 
that sticks to the empty shell of the past and ignores or refuses to 
understand the hard facts of the present, which are not only political 
and economic but also include the feelings and urges of vast num- 
bers of people. Such realism is more imaginative and divorced 
from to-day's and to-morrow's problems than much of the so- 
called idealism of many people. 

Geopolitics has now become the anchor of the realist and its 
jargon of 'heartland' and 'rimland' is supposed to throw light on 
the mystery of national growth and decay. Originating in Eng- 
land (or was it Scotland?), it became the guiding light of the 
nazis, fed their dreams and ambitions of world domination, and 
led them to disaster. A partial truth is sometimes more dangerous 
than a falsehood; a truth that has had its day blinds one to the 
reality of the present. H. J. Mackinder's theory of geopolitics, 
subsequently developed in Germany, was based on the growth 
of civilization on the oceanic fringes of the continents (Asia and 
Europe), which had to be defended from pressure from land 
invaders from the 'heartland,' which was supposed to be the 
centre of the Eurasian block. Control of this heartland meant 
world domination. But civilization is no longer confined to the 
oceanic fringes and tends to become universal in its scope and 
content. The growth of the Americas also does not fit in with 
a Eurasian heartland dominating the world. And air-power has 
brought a new factor which has upset the balance between sea- 
power and land-power. 

Germany, nursing dreams of world conquest, was obsessed by 
fears of encirclement. Soviet Russia feared a combination of her 
enemies. England's national policy has long been based on a 
balance of power in Europe and opposition to any dominating 
power there. Always there has been fear of others, and that fear 
has led to aggression and tortuous intrigues. An entirely new 
situation will arise after the present war, with two dominating 

539 



world powers — the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. — and the rest a good 
distance behind them, unless they form some kind of bloc. And 
now even the United States of America are told by Professor 
Spykman, in his last testament, that they are in danger of en- 
circlement, that they should ally themselves with a 'rimland' 
nation, that in any event they should not prevent the 'heartland' 
(which means now the U.S.S.R.) from uniting with the rimland. 

All this looks very clever and realistic and yet is supremely 
foolish, for it is based on the old policy of expansion and empire 
and the balance ofpower, which inevitably leads to conflict and 
war. Since the world happens to be round, every country is 
encircled by others. To avoid such encirclements by the methods 
of power politics, there must be alliances and counter-alliances, 
expansion, and conquest. But, however huge a country's domi- 
nation or sphere of influence becomes, there is always the danger 
of encirclement by those who have been left out of it, and who, 
on their part, fear this abnormal growth of a rival power. The 
only way to get rid of this danger is by world conquest or by the 
eliminations of every possible rival. We are witnessing to-day the 
failure of the latest attempt at world domination. Will that lesson 
be learnt or will there be others, driven by ambition and pride 
of race and power, to try their fortunes on this fatal field? 

There really seems no alternative between world conquest and 
world association; there is no choice of a middle course. The 
old divisions and the quest of power politics have little meaning 
to-day and do not fit in with our environment, yet they continue. 
The interests and activities of states overflow their boundaries 
and are world-wide. No nation can isolate itself or be indifferent 
to the political or economic fate of other nations. If there is no 
co-operation there is bound to be friction with its inevitable 
results. Co-operation can only be on a basis of equality and mutual 
welfare, on a pulling-up of the backward nations and peoples to 
a common level of well-being and cultural advancement, on 
an elimination of racialism and domination. No nation and no 
people are going to tolerate domination and exploitation by 
another, even though this is given some more pleasant name. 
Nor will they remain indifferent to their own poverty and misery 
when other parts of the world are flourishing. That was only 
possible when there was ignorance of what was happening else- 
where. 

All this seems obvious, and yet the long record of past hap- 
penings tell us that the mind of man lags far behind the course 
of events and adjusts itself only slowly to them. Self-interest itself 
should drive every nation to this wider co-operation in order to 
escape disaster in the future and build its own free life on the basis 
of others' freedom. But the self-interest of the 'realist' is far too 
limited by past myths and dogmas, and regards ideas and social 
540 



forms, suited to one age, as immutable and as unchanging parts 
of human nature and society, forgetting that nothing is so change- 
able as human nature and society. Religious forms and notions 
take permanent shape, social institutions become petrified, war 
is looked upon as a biological necessity, empire and expansion 
as the prerogatives of a dynamic and progressive people, the profit 
motive as the central fact dominating human relations, and 
ethnocentrism, a belief in racial superiority, becomes an article 
of faith and, even when not proclaimed, is taken for granted. Some 
of these ideas were common to the civilizations of east and west; 
many of them form the back-ground of modern western civilization 
out of which fascism and nazism grew. Ethically there is no great 
difference between them and the fascist creed, though the latter 
went much further in its contempt for human life and all that 
humanism stands for. Indeed, humanism, which coloured the 
outlook of Europe for so long, is a vanishing tradition there. The 
seeds offascism were present in the political and economic structure 
ofthe west. Unless there is a break from this past ideology, success 
in war brings no great change. The old myths and fancies continue 
and, pursued as of old by the Furies, we go through the self-same 
cycle again. 

The two outstanding facts emerging from the war are the 
growth in power and actual and potential wealth of the U.S.A. 
and the U.S.S.R. The Soviet Union actually is probably poorer 
than it was prior to the war, owing to enormous destruction, but 
its potential is tremendous and it will rapidly make good and 
go further ahead. In physical and economic power there will be 
none to challenge it on the Eurasian continent. Already it is 
showing an expansionist tendency and is extending its territories 
more or less on the basis ofthe Tsar's Empire. How far this process 
will go it is difficult to say. Its socialist economy does not neces- 
sarily lead to expansion for it can be made self-sufficient. But other 
forces and old suspicions are at play and again we notice the fear 
of so-called encirclement. In any event the U.S.S.R. will be busy 
for many years in repairing the ravages of war. Yet the tendency 
to expand, if not in territory then in other ways, is evident. No 
other country to-day presents- such a politically solid and econo- 
mically well-balanced picture as the Soviet Union, though some 
ofthe developments there in recent years have come as a shock to 
many of its old admirers. Its present leaders have an unchallengeable 
position, and everything depends on their outlook for the future. 

The United States of America have astonished the world by 
their stupendous production and organizing capacity. They 
have thus not only played a leading part in the war but have 
accelerated a process inherent in American economy and produc- 
ed a problem for themselves which will tax their wits and energies 

541 



to the utmost. Indeed it is not easy to foresee how they will solve 
it within the limits of their existing economic structure without 
serious internal and external friction. It is said that America has 
ceased to be isolationist. Inevitably so, for she must now depend 
to an extent on her exports abroad. What was a marginal factor 
in her pre-war economy, which could almost be ignored, will now 
be a dominant consideration. Where will all these exports go to, 
without creating friction and conflict, when production for peace 
takes the pace of war production? And how will the millions of 
armed men returning home be absorbed? Every warring country 
will have to face this problem, but none to the same extent as the 
U.S.A. The vast technological changes that have taken place will 
lead to very great over-production or to mass unemployment, or 
possibly to both. Unemployment on any major scale will be bitterly 
resented and has been ruled out by the declared policy of the 
United States Government. Much thought is already being given 
to the absorption of the returning soldiers, etc., in gainful employ- 
ment and to the prevention of unemployment. Whatever the 
domestic aspect of all this may be, and it will be serious enough 
unless basic changes take place, the international aspect is equally 
important. 

Such is the curious nature of present-day economy in these 
days of mass production, that the U.S.A., the wealthiest and most 
powerful country in the world, becomes dependent on other 
countries absorbing its surplus production. For some years after 
the war there will be a big demand in Europe, China, and India 
for machinery as well as manufactured goods. This will be of 
considerable help to America to dispose of her surplus. But 
every country will rapidly develop its own capacity to manufac- 
ture most of its needs, and exports will tend to be limited to 
specialized goods not produced elsewhere. The consumption 
capacity will also be limited by the purchasing power of the masses, 
and to raise this fundamental economic changes will be needed. 
It is conceivable that with the substantial raising of the standard 
of living all over the world, international trade and exchange 
of goods will prosper and increase. But that raising itself requires 
a removal of political and economic fetters on production and 
distribution in the colonial and backward countries. That 
inevitably involves big changes with their consequent dislocation 
and adaptation to new systems. 

England's economy has been based in the past on a big export 
business, on investments abroad, on the City of London's finan- 
cial leadership, and on a vast maritime carrier trade. Before the 
war Britain depended on imports for nearly 50 per cent of her 
food supplies. Probably this dependence is less now owing to her 
intensive food-growing campaign. These imports of food as well 

542 



as raw materials had to be paid for by exports of manufactured 
goods, investments, shipping, financial services, and what are 
called 'invisible' exports. Foreign trade and, in particular, a 
large volume of exports were thus an essential and vital feature 
of British economy. That economy was maintained by the exei- 
cise of monopoly controls in the colonial areas and special arrange- 
ments within the empire to maintain some kind of equilibrium. 
Those monopoly controls and arrangements were much to the 
disadvantage of the colonies and dependencies and it is hardly 
possible to maintain them in these old forms in future. Britain's 
foreign investments have disappeared and given place to huge 
debts, and London's financial supremacy has also gone. This 
means that in the post-war years Britain will have to depend even 
more on her export business and her carrier trade. And yet the 
possibilities of increasing exports, or even maintaining them at 
the old level, are strictly limited. 

Great Britain's imports (less re-exports) in the pre-war years 
1936-38 averaged £866,000,000. They were paid for as follows: 

Exports • . • • £478 million. 

Income on foreign investments . . £203 „ 

Shipping services .. .. £105 „ 

Financial services . . . . £40 „ 

Deficit .. •. £40 

£866 million. 

Instead of the substantial income from foreign investment 
there is going to be a heavy burden of external debt, due to 
borrowings in goods and services (apart from American Lend- 
Lease) from India, Egypt, Argentine, and other countries. Lord 
Keynes has estimated that, at the end of the war, these frozen 
sterling credits will amount to £3,000,000,000. At 5 per cent 
this will amount to £150 million per annum. Thus on a pre-war 
average basis Britain may have to face a deficit of considerably 
over £300 millions annually. Unless this is made good by addi- 
tional income from exports and various services, it will lead to a 
marked reduction in living standards. 

This appears to be the governing factor in Britain's post-war 
policy, and if she is to maintain her present economy, she feels 
she must retain her colonial empire, with only such minor changes 
as are unavoidable, only as the dominant partner of a group 
of countries, colonial and non-colonial, does she hope to play 
a leading role, and to balance, politically and economically, the 
vast resources of the two giant powers — the United States of 
America and the Soviet Union. Hence the desire to continue her 
empire, to hold on to what she has got, as well as to extend her 

543 



sphere of influence over fresh territories, for instance over Thailand. 
Hence also the aim of British policy to bring about a closer inte- 
gration with the Dominions, as well as some of the smaller coun- 
tries of western Europe. French and Dutch colonial policy gene- 
rally support the British view in regard to colonies and depend- 
encies. The Dutch Empire is indeed very much a 'satellite 
empire' and it could not continue to exist without the British 
Empire. 

It is easy to understand these trends of British policy, based, 
as they are, on past outlook and standards and formulated by 
men tied up with that past. Yet, within that past context of a 
nineteenth century economy, the difficulties facing Britain to-day 
are very great. In the long run, her position is weak, her economy 
unsuited to present-day conditions, her economic resources are 
limited, and her industrial and military strength cannot be main- 
tained at the old level. There is an essential instability in the 
methods suggested to maintain that old economy, for they lead 
to unceasing conflict, to lack of security, and to the growth of 
ill-will in the dependencies, which may make the future still 
more perilous for Britain. The desire of the British, understand- 
ble enough, to maintain their living standards on the old level 
and even to raise them, is thus made dependent upon protected 
markets for British exports and controlled colonial and other 
areas for the supply of raw materials and cheap food. This means 
that British living standards must be kept up even at the cost of 
keeping down at subsistence level or less hundreds of millions of 
peoples in Asia and Africa. No one wants to reduce British stand- 
ards, but it is obvious that the peoples of Asia and Africa are never 
going to agree to the maintenance of this colonial economy which 
keeps them at a sub-human level. The annual purchasing power 
(pre-war) in Britain is said to have been £9 7 per capita (in the 
U.S.A. it was much greater); in India it was less than £6. These 
vast differences cannot be tolerated, and indeed the diminishing 
returns of a colonial economy ultimately affect adversely even 
the dominating power. In the U.S.A. this is vividly realized, and 
hence their desire to raise the colonial peoples' purchasing power 
through industrialization and self-government. Even in Britain 
there is some realization of the necessity of Indian industrialization, 
and -he Bengal famine made many people think furiously on this 
subject. But British policy aims at industrial development in India 
under British control with a privileged position for British industry. 
The industrialization of India, as of other countries in Asia, is 
bound to take place; the only question is one of pace. But it is very 
doubtful if it can be fitted in with any form of colonial economy 
or foreign control. 

The British Empire, as it is to-day, is not of course a geogra- 
phical unit; nor is it an effective economic or military unit. It is 

544 



a historical and sentimental unit. Sentiment and old bonds count 
still, but they are not likely to override, in the long run, other 
more vital considerations. And even this sentiment applies only 
to certain areas containing populations racially similar to the 
people of Britain. It certainly does not apply to India or the rest 
of the dependent colonial empire, where it is the other way about. 
It does not even apply to South Africa, so far as the Boers are 
concerned. In the major Dominions subtle changes are taking 
place which tend to weaken their traditional links with Britain. 
Canada, which has grown greatly in industrial stature during 
the war, is an important power, closely tied up with the U.S.A. 
She has developed an expanding economy which will, in some 
repects, come in the way of British industry. Australia and New 
Zealand, also with expanding economics, are realizing that they 
are not in the European orbit of Great Britain but in the Asiatic- 
American orbit of the Pacific, where the United States are likely 
to play a dominant role. Culturally, both Canada and Australia 
are progressively drawn towards the U.S.A. 

The British colonial outlook to-day does not fit in with Ameri- 
can policy and expansionist tendencies. The United States want 
open markets for their exports and do not look with favour on 
attempts by other powers to limit or control them. They want 
rapid industrialization of Asia's millions and higher standards 
everywhere, not for sentimental reasons but to dispose of their 
surplus goods. Friction between American and British export 
businesses and maritime trade seems to be inevitable. America's 
desire to establish world air supremacy, for which she has at 
present abundant resources, is resented in England. America 
probably favours an independent Thailand while England would 
prefer to make it a semi-colony. These opposing approaches based, 
in each case, on the nature of the respective economy aimed at, 
run through the whole colonial sphere. 

The aim of British policy to have a closer integration of the 
commonwealth and empire is understandable in the peculiar cir- 
cumstances in which Britain is placed to-day. But against it is 
the logic of facts and world tendencies, as well as the growth of 
dominion nationalism and the disruptive tendencies of the colo- 
nial empire. To try to build on old foundations, to continue to 
think in terms of a vanished age, to dream and talk still of an 
empire and of monopolies spread out all over the globe, is for 
Britain an even more unwise and shortsighted policy than it might 
be for some other nations; for most of the reasons which made 
her a politically, industrially, and financially dominant nation 
have disappeared. Nevertheless Britain has had in the past, and 
has still, remarkable qualities — courage and the will to pull to- 
gether, scientific and constructive ability and a capacity for adapt- 

545 



ation. These qualities, and others which she possesses go a long 
way to make a nation great and enable it to overcome the dan- 
gers and perils that confront it. And so she may be able to face 
her vital and urgent problems by changing over to a different 
and more balanced economic structure. But it is highly unlikely 
that she will succeed if she tries to continue, as of old, with an 
empire tacked on to her and supporting her. 

Much will inevitably depend on American and Soviet policy, 
and on the degree of co-ordination or conflict between the two 
and Britain. Everybody talks loudly about the necessity for the 
Big Three to pull together in the interests of world peace and 
co-operation, yet rifts and differences peep out at every stage, even 
during the course of the war. Whatever the future may hold, it 
is clear that the economy of the U.S.A. after the war will be 
powerfully expansionist and almost explosive in its consequences. 
Will this lead to some new kind of imperialism ? It would be yet 
another tragedy if it did so, for America has the power and oppor- 
tunity to set the pace for the future. 

The future policy of the Soviet Union is yet shrouded in 
mystery, but there have been some revealing glimpses of it already. 
It aims at having as many friendly and dependent or semi- 
dependent countries near its borders as possible. Though working 
with other powers for the establishment of some world organi- 
zation, it relies more on building up its own strength on an un- 
assailable basis. So, presumably, do other nations also, in so far 
as they can. That is not a hopeful prelude to world co-operation. 
Between the Soviet Union and other countries there is not the 
same struggle for export markets as between Britain and the U.S.A. 
But the differences are deeper, their respective viewpoints further 
apart, and mutual suspicions have not been allayed even by joint 
effort in the war. If these differences grow, the U.S.A. and Britain 
will tend to seek each other's company and support as against the 
U.S.S.R. group of nations. 

Where do the hundreds of millions of Asia and Africa come 
in this picture ? They have become increasingly conscious of 
themselves and their destiny, and at the same time are also world 
conscious. Large numbers of them follow world events with inte- 
rest. For them, inevitably, the test of each move or happening is 
this: Does it help towards our liberation? Does it end the domi- 
nation of one country over another? Will it enable us to live freely 
the life of our choice in co-operation with others? Does it bring 
equality and equal opportunity for nations as well as groups 
within each nation? Does it hold forth the promise of an early 
liquidation of poverty and illiteracy and bring better living condi- 
tions ? They are nationalistic but this nationalism seeks no dominion 
over, or interference with, others. They welcome all attempts at 

546 



world co-operation and the establishment of an international 
order, but they wonder and suspect if this may not be another 
device for continuing the old domination. Large parts of Asia 
and Africa consist of an awakened, discontented, seething huma- 
nity, no longer prepared to tolerate existing conditions. Conditions 
and problems differ greatly in the various countries of Asia, but 
throughout this vast area, in China and India, in south-east Asia, 
in western Asia, and the Arab world run common threads of senti- 
ment and invisible links which hold them together. 

For a thousand years or more, while Europe was backward and 
often engulfed in its dark ages, Asia represented the advancing 
spirit of man. Epoch after epoch of a brilliant culture flourished 
there and great centres of civilization and power grew up. About 
five hundred years ago Europe revived and slowly spread east- 
ward and westward till, in the course of centuries, it became the 
dominant continent of the world in power, wealth, and culture. 
Was there some cycle about this change and is that process now 
being reversed? Certainly, power and authority have shifted 
more to America in the far west and to eastern Europe, which 
was organically hardly a part of the European heritage. And in 
the east also there has been tremendous growth in Siberia, and 
other countries of the east are ripe for change and rapid advance. 
Will there be conflict in the future or a new equilibrium between 
the east and the west? 

But only the distant future will decide that, and it serves little 
purpose to look so far ahead. For the present we have to carry 
the burden of the day and face the many problems which afflict 
us. Behind these problems in India, as in many other countries, 
lies the real issue, which is not merely the establishment of demo- 
cracy of the nineteenth century European type but also of far- 
reaching social revolution. Democracy has itself become involved 
in that seemingly inevitable change, and hence among those who 
disapprove of the latter, doubts and denials arise about the feasibi- 
lity of democracy, and this leads to fascist tendencies and the 
continuation of an imperialist outlook. All our present-day problems 
in India — the communal or minority problem, the Indian princes, 
vested interests of religious groups and the big landowners, and 
the entrenched interests of British authority and industry in India 
— ultimately resolve themselves into opposition to social change. 
And because any real democracy is likely to lead to such change, 
therefore democracy itself is objected to and considered as un- 
suited to the peculiar conditions of India. So the problems of 
India, for all their seeming variety and differences from others, 
are of the same essential nature as the problems of China or Spain 
or many other countries of Europe and elsewhere, which the war 
has brought to the surface. Many of the resistance movements of 

547 



Europe reflect these conflicts. Everywhere the old equilibrium of 
social forces has been upset, and till a new equilibrium is esta- 
blished there will be tension, trouble, and conflict. From these 
problems of the moment we are led to one of the central problems 
of our time: how to combine democracy with socialism, how to 
maintain individual freedom and initiative and yet have centra- 
lized social control and planning of the economics of the people, 
on the national as well as the international plane. 

Freedom and Empire 

The U.S.A. and the Soviet Union seem destined to play a vital 
part in the future. They differ from each other almost as much 
as any two advanced countries can differ and even their faults 
lie in opposite directions. All the evils of a purely political demo- 
cracy are evident in the U.S.A.; the evils of the lack of political 
democracy are present in the U.S.S.R. And yet they have much 
in common — a dynamic outlook and vast resources, a social 
fluidity, an absence of a medieval background, a faith in science 
and its applications, and widespread education and opportunities 
for the people. In America, in spite of vast differences in income, 
there are no fixed classes as in most countries and there is a sense 
of equality. In Russia, the outstanding event of the past twenty 
years has been the tremendous educational and cultural achieve- 
ments of the masses. Thus in both countries the essential basis for 
a progressive, democratic society is present, for no such society 
can be based on the rule of a small intellectual elite over an ignorant 
and apathetic people. Nor can such an elite long continue to domi- 
nate over an educationally and culturally advanced people. 

A hundred years ago de Tocqueville, discussing the Americans 
Of those days, said: 'If the democratic principle does not, on the 
one hand, induce men to cultivate science for its own sake, on 
the other, it does enormously increase the number of those who 
do cultivate it... .Permanent inequality of conditions leads men 
to confine themselves to the arrogant and sterile researches of 
abstract truths, whilst the social condition and institutions of 
democracy prepare them to seek the immediate and useful prac- 
tical results of the sciences. The tendency is natural and inevit- 
able.' Since then America has developed and changed and be- 
come an amalgam of many races, but its essential characteristics 
continue. 

Yet another common characteristic of both Americans and 
Russians is that they do not carry that heavy burden of the past 
which has oppressed Asia and Europe, and conditioned to a great 
extent their activities and conflicts. They cannot, of course, escape, 
as none of us can, the terrible burden of this generation. But they 

548 



have a clearer past, so far as other people are concerned, and are 
less encumbered for their journey into the future. 

As a result of this they can approach other peoples without that 
background of mutual distrust which always accompanies the 
contacts of well-established imperialist nations with others. Not 
that their past is free of spots and stains and suspicions. Americans 
have their negro problem which is a continuing reproach to their 
professions of democracy and equality. Russians have yet to wipe 
out memories of past hatreds in eastern Europe and the present 
war is adding to them. Still Americans make friends easily in 
other countries. Russians are almost totally devoid of racialism. 

Most of the European nations are full of mutual hatreds and 
past conflicts and injustices. The imperialist powers have inevitably 
added to this the intense dislike for them of people over whom 
they have ruled. Because of England's long record of imperialist 
rule, her burden is the greatest. Because of this, or because ofracial 
characteristics, Englishmen are reserved and exclusive and do not 
easily make friends with others. They are unfortunately judged 
abroad by their official representatives who are seldom the standard- 
bearers of their liberalism or culture, and who often combine 
snobbery with an apparent piety. These officials have a peculiar 
knack of antagonising others. Some months ago a secretary to the 
Government of India wrote an official letter to Mr. Gandhi (in 
detention) which was an example of studied insolence, and which 
was looked upon by large numbers of people as a deliberate insult 
to the Indian people. For Gandhi happens to be a symbol of India. 

Another era of imperialism, or an age of international co- 
operation or world commonwealth, which is it going to be in 
the future? The scales incline towards the former and the old 
arguments are repeated but not with the old candour. The moral 
urges of mankind and its sacrifices are used for base ends, and 
rulers exploit the goodness and nobility of man for evil purposes 
and take advantage of the fears, hatreds, and false ambitions 
of the people. They used to be more frank about empire in the 
old days. Speaking of the Athenian empire, Thucydides wrote: 
'We make no fine profession of having a right to our empire 
because we overthrew the Barbarian single-handed, or because 
we risked our existence for the sake of our dependents and of 
civilization. States, like men, cannot be blamed for providing for 
their proper safety. If we are now here in Sicily, it is in the interest 

of our own security It is fear that forces us to cling to our 

empire in Greece, and it is fear that drives us hither, with the 
help of our friends, to order matters in Sicily.' And again when 
he referred to the tribute of the Athenian colonies: 'It may seem 
wickedness to have won it; but it is certainly folly to let it go.' 

The history of Athens is full of lessons of the incompatibility 

549 



of democracy with empire, of the tyranny of a democratic state 
over its colonies, and the swift deterioration and fall of that empire. 
No upholder of freedom and empire to-day could state his case 
so well and so eloquently as Thucydides did: 'We are the leaders 
of civilization, the pioneers of the human race. Our society and 
intercourse is the highest blessing man can confer. To be within 
the circle of our influence is not dependence but a privilege. Not 
all the wealth of the east can repay the riches we bestow. So we 
can work on cheerfully, using the means and the money that 
flow into us, confident that, try as they will, we shall still be credi- 
tors. For through effort and suffering and on many a stricken 
field we have found the secret of human power, which is the secret 
of happiness. Men have guessed at it under many names; but 
we alone have learnt to know it and to make it at home in our city. 
And the name we know it by is freedom, for it has taught us that 
to serve is to be free. Do you wonder why it is that alone among 
mankind we confer our benefits, not on conditions of self-interest, 
but in the fearless confidence of freedom?' 

All this has a familiar ring in these days when freedom and 
democracy are so loudly proclaimed and yet limited to some 
only. There is truth in it and a denial of truth. Thucydides knew 
little of the rest of mankind and his vision was confined to the 
Mediterranean countries. Proud of the freedom of his famous city, 
praising this freedom as the secret of happiness and human power, 
yet he did not realize that others also aspired to this freedom. 
Athens, lover of freedom, sacked and destroyed Melos and put 
to death all the grown men there and sold the women and children 
as slaves. Even while Thucydides was writing of the empire and 
freedom of Athens, that empire had crumbled away and that 
freedom was no more. 

For it is not possible for long to combine freedom with domi- 
nation and slavery; one overcomes the other and only a little 
time divides the pride and glory of empire from its fall. To-day, 
much more than ever before, freedom is indivisible. The splendid 
eulogy of Pericles for his beloved city was followed soon after 
by its fall and the occupation of the Acropolis by a Spartan 
garrison. Yet his words move us still for their love of beauty, 
wisdom, freedom and courage, not merely in their application 
to the Athens of his day, but in the larger context of the world: 
'We are lovers of beauty without extravagance, and lovers of 
wisdom without unmanliness. Wealth to us is not mere material 
for vainglory but an opportunity for achievement; and poverty 
we think it no disgrace to acknowledge but a real degradation 

to make no effort to overcome Let us draw strength, not 

merely from twice-told arguments — how fair and noble a thing 
it is to show courage in battle — but from the busy spectacle of 

550 



our great city's life as we have it before us day by day, falling in 
love with her as we see her, and remembering that all this great- 
ness she owes to men with the fighter's daring, the wise man's 
understanding of his duty, and the good man's self-discipline in 
its performance — to men who, if they failed in any ordeal, dis- 
dained to deprive the city of their services, but sacrificed their 
lives as the best offerings on her behalf. So they gave their bodies 
to the commonwealth and received, each for his own memory, 
praise that will never die, and with it the grandest of all sepulchres, 
not that in which their mortal bones are laid, but a home in the 
minds of men, where their glory remains fresh to stir to speech 
or action as the occasion comes by. For the whole earth is a 
sepulchre of famous men; and their story is not graven only on 
stone over their native earth, but lives on far away, without 
visible symbol, woven into the stuff of other men's lives. For you 
now it remains to rival what they have done and, knowing the 
secret of happiness to be freedom and the secret of freedom a 
brave heart, not idly to stand aside from the enemy's onset.'* 

The Problem of Population. Falling Birth-rates and 
National Decay 

Five years of war have brought about enormous changes and 
displacements of population on a vaster scale probably than at 
any previous epoch of history. Apart from the scores of millions 
of war casualties, more especially in China, Russia, Poland, and 
Germany, masses of people have been uprooted from their homes 
and countries. There have been military requirements, labour 
demands and enforced evacuations, and swarms of refugees have 
fled before invading armies. Even before the war the refugee 
problem in Europe, due to nazi policy, had grown to formidable 
proportions. But these pale into insignificance when compared 
to war developments. Apart from the direct consequences of the 
war, the changes in Europe are largely due to a deliberate demo- 
graphic policy pursued by the nazis. They have apparently killed 
off millions of Jews and broken up the population integrity of 
many countries occupied by them. In the Soviet Union many 
millions have moved east, forming new settlements on the other 
side of the Urals, which are likely to be permanent. In China it 
is estimated that fifty million people have been torn from their 
roots. 

Attempts will, no doubt, be made to repatriate and rehabili- 
tate these people, or such as survive after the war, though the 
task is one of prodigious complexity. Many will come back to 

* The quotations from Thucydides have been taken from Alfred A immern's 'The Greek 
Commonwealth' (1924). 



their old homes, many may choose to remain in their new en- 
vironment. On the other hand, it seems also likely that, as a result 
of political changes in Europe, there will be further displacement 
and exchange of populations. 

Of far deeper and more far-reaching significance are the 
changes, partly physiological and biological, that are rapidly 
changing the population of the world. The industrial revolution 
and the spread of modern technology resulted in a rapid growth 
of population in Europe, and more especially in north-western 
and central Europe. As this technology has spread eastwards to 
the Soviet Union, aided by a new economic structure and other 
factors, there has been an even more spectacular increase in 
population in these regions. This eastward sweep of technology, 
accompanied by education, sanitation, and better public health, 
is continuing and will cover many of the countries of Asia. Some 
of these countries, like India, far from needing a bigger popula- 
tion, 'would be better off with fewer people. 

Meanwhile, in western Europe a reverse process has set in as 
regard population and the problem of a falling birth-rate is grow- 
ing in importance. 

This tendency appears to be widespread and affects most coun- 
tries in the world, with some notable exceptions like China, 
India, Java, and the U.S.S.R. It is most marked in the industrially 
advanced countries. The population of France ceased to grow 
many years ago and is now slowly declining. In England a steady 
fall in the fertility rate has been noticeable since the eighties of 
the last century, and it is the lowest now in Europe, except for 
France. Hitler's and Mussolini's efforts to increase the birth-rate 
in Germany and Italy bore only temporary results. In northern, 
western, and central Europe the decline is more marked than in 
southern and eastern Europe (exclusive of U.S.S.R.), but similar 
tendencies are observable in all these regions. Europe, apart 
from Russia, reaches its maximum population, according to 
present trends, about 1955 and then begins to decline. This 
has nothing to do with war losses which will aggravate this down- 
ward tendency. 

The Soviet Union, on the other hand, goes on rapidly increas- 
ing its population and is likely to reach a figure exceeding 250 
millions by 1970. This does not include any additions due to 
territorial changes as a result of the war. This growth of popu- 
lation taken together with technological and other kinds of 
progress inevitably makes it the dominant power in Europe and 
Asia. In Asia much depends on the industrial development of 
China and India. Their huge populations are a burden and a 
weakness unless they are properly and productively organized. 
In Europe the great colonial powers of the past appear to have 

552 



definitely passed the stage of expansion and aggression. Their 
economic and political organization and the skill and ability of 
their people may still give them an important place in world 
affairs, but they will progressively cease to count as major powers, 
unless they function as a group. 'It does not seem likely that any 
nation of north-western and central Europe will challenge the 
world again. Germany, like her western neighbours, has passed 
the period in which she could become a dominant world power, 
owing to the diffusion of technological civilization to peoples that 
are growing more rapidly.'* 

Technological and industrial growth have brought power to a 
number of western peoples and countries. It is exceedingly un- 
likely that this source of power will remain the monopoly of a few 
nations. Hence the political and economic dominance of Europe 
over great parts of the world must inevitably decline rapidly 
and it will cease to be the nerve-centre of the Eurasian continent 
and Africa. Because of this basic reason the old European powers 
will think and act more in terms of peace and international co- 
operation and will avoid war in so far as they can. When aggres- 
sion is almost certain to lead to disaster, it ceases to attract. But 
those world powers, that are still dominant, have not the same 
urge to co-operation with others, unless it is the moral urge, which 
is very seldom associated with power. 

What is the cause of this widespread phenomenon of falling 
birth-rates? The increasing use of contraceptives and the desire 
to have small regulated families may have produced some effect,' 
but it is generally recognized that this has not made any great 
difference. In Ireland, which is a catholic country and where 
contraceptives are presumably little used, a fall in the birth-rate 
started earlier than in other countries. Probably the increasing 
postponement of marriages in the west is one of the causes. Eco- 
nomic factors may have some influence but even that is hardly 
an important consideration. It is well known that as a rule fertility 
is higher among the poor than among the rich, as it is also higher 
in rural areas than in urban. A smaller group can maintain higher 
standards, and the growth of individualism lessens the importance 
of the group and the race. Professor J. B. S. Haldane tells us that 
it is a general rule that in a great many civilized societies those 
types which are regarded in the particular society in question as 
admirable are less fertile than the general run of the population. 
Thus those societies would appear to be biologically unstable. Large 
families are often associated with inferior intelligence. Economic 
success is also supposed to be the opposite of biological success. 

* Frank W. Notestein in an article nn 'Population and Power in Post-War Europe' in the 
American, Foreign Affairs' for April, 1944. (The I.L.O. have issued a study on 'The Dis- 
placement of Population in Europe' by E. M. Kulischer 1943). 

553 



Little seems to be known about the basic causes behind the 
falling birth-rate, though many subsidiary ones are suggested. 
It is possible, however, that certain physiological and biological 
reasons lie at the back of it — the kind of life industrialized 
communities lead and the environment in which they live. A 
deficient diet, alcoholism, neurotic conditions or poor health 
generally, mental or physical, affect reproduction. And yet 
disease-ridden and insufficiently fed communities, as in India, 
still reproduce ihemselves at a prodigious rate. Perhaps the strain 
and stress of modern life, the ceaseless competition and worry, 
lessen fertility. Probably the divorce from the life-giving soil 
is an important factor. Even in America the fertility of farm 
labourers is considerably more than double that of the profes- 
sional classes. 

It would seem that the kind of modern civilization that deve- 
loped first in the west and spread elsewhere, and especially the 
metropolitan life that has been its chief feature, produces an 
unstable society which gradually loses its vitality. Life advances 
in many fields and yet it loses its grip; it becomes more artificial 
and slowly ebbs away. More and more stimulants are needed — 
drugs to enable us to sleep or to perform our other natural func- 
tions, foods and drinks that tickle the palate and produce a mo- 
mentary exhilaration at the .cost of weakening the system, and 
special devices to give us a temporary sensation of pleasure and 
excitement — and after the stimulation comes the reaction and a 
sense of emptiness. With all its splendid manifestations and real 
achievements, we have created a civilization which has some- 
thing counterfeit about it. We eat ersatz foods produced with 
the help of ersatz fertilizers; we indulge in ersatz emotions and 
our human relations seldom go below the superficial plane. The 
advertiser is one of the symbols of our age with his continuous 
and raucous attempts to delude us and dull our powers of per- 
ception and induce us to buy unnecessary and even harmful 
products. I am not blaming others for this state of affairs. We 
are all products of this age with the characteristics of our genera- 
tion, equally entitled to credit or blame. Certainly I am as much 
a part of this civilization, that I both appreciate and criticize, 
as any one else and my habits and ways of thought are conditioned 
by it. 

What is wrong with modern civilization which produces at 
the roots these signs of sterility and racial decadence? But this 
is nothing new, it has happened before and history is full of 
examples of it. Imperial Rome in its decline was far worse. Is 
there a cycle governing this inner decay and can we seek out the 
causes and eliminate them? Modern industrialism and the capi- 
talist structure of society cannot be the sole causes, for decadence 

554 



has often occurred without them. It is probable, however, that 
in their present forms they do create an environment, a physical 
and mental climate, which is favourable for the functioning of those 
causes. If the basic cause is something spiritual, something affect- 
ing the mind and spirit of man, it is difficult to grasp though we 
may try to understand it or intuitively feel it. But one fact seems 
to stand out: that a divorce from the soil, from the good earth, 
is bad for the individual and the race. 

The earth and the sun are the sources of life and if we keep away 
from them for long life begins to ebb away. Modern industria- 
lized communities have lost touch with the soil and do not experi- 
ence that joy which nature gives and the rich glow of health which 
comes from contact with mother earth. They talk of nature's 
beauty and go to seek it in occasional week-ends, littering the 
countryside with the product of their own artificial lives, but they 
cannot commune with nature or feel part of it. It is something to 
look at and admire, because they are told to do so, and then return 
with a sigh of relief to their normal haunts; just as they might try 
to admire some classic poet or writer and then, wearied by the 
attempt, return to their favourite novel or detective story, where 
no effort of mind is necessary. They are not children of nature, 
like the old Greeks or Indians, but strangers paying an embar- 
rassing call on a scarce-known distant relative. And so they do not 
experience that joy in nature's rich life and infinite variety and 
that feeling of being intensely alive which came so naturally to 
our forefathers. Is it surprising then that nature treats them as 
unwanted step-children? 

We cannot go back to that old pantheistic outlook and yet per- 
haps we may still sense the mystery of nature, listen to its song of 
life and beauty, and draw vitality from it. That song is not sung in 
the chosen spots only, and we can hear it, if we have the ears for 
it, almost everywhere. But there are some places where it charms 
even those who are unprepared for it and comes like the deep 
notes of a distant and powerful organ. Among these favoured 
spots is Kashmir where loveliness dwells and an enchantment steals 
over the senses. Writing about Kashmir, M. Foucher, the French 
savant, says: 'May I go further and say what I believe to be the 
true reason for this special charm of Kashmir, the charm which 
everybody seeks, even those who do not try to analyse it? It can- 
not be only because of its magnificent woods, the pure limpidity 
ofits lakes, the splendour of its snowy mountain tops, or the happy 
murmur of its myriad brooks sounding in the cool soft air. Nor 
can it be only the grace or majesty ofits ancient buildings, though 
the ruins of Martand rise at the prow of their Karewa as proudly 
as a Greek temple on a promontory, and the little shrine of Payar, 
carved out often stones, has the perfect proportions of the choragic 

555 



monuments of Lysicrates. One cannot even say that it comes of the 
combination of art and landscape, for fine buildings in a romantic 
setting are to be found in many other countries. But what is found 
in Kashmir alone is the grouping of these two kinds of beauty in 
the midst of a nature still animated with a mysterious life, which 
knows how to whisper close to our ears and make the pagan depths 
of us quiver, which leads us back, consciously or unconsciously, 
to those past days lamented by the poet, when the world was 
young, when 

le del sur la terre 
Marchait et respirait dans un peuple de dieux. * 

But my purpose is not to praise Kashmir, though my partiality 
for it occasionally leads me astray, nor to advance an argument 
in favour of pantheism, though I am pagan enough to believe 
that a touch of paganism is good for the mind and body. I do 
think that life cut off completely from the soil will ultimately 
wither away. Of course there is seldom such a complete cutting 
off and the processes of nature take their time. But it is a weak- 
ness of modern civilization that it is progressively going further 
away from the life-giving elements. The competitive and acqui- 
sitive characteristics of modern capitalist society, the enthrone- 
ment of wealth above everything else, the continuous strain and 
the lack of security for many, add to the ill-health of the mind 
and produce neurotic states. A saner and more balanced econo- 
mic structure would lead to an improvement of these conditions. 
Even so it will be necessary to have greater and more living 
contacts with the land and nature. This does not mean a return 
to the land in the old and limited sense of the word, or to a going 
back to primitive ways of life. That remedy might well be worse 
than the disease. It should be possible to organize modern industry 
in such a way as to keep men and women, as far as possible, in 
touch with the land, and to raise the cultural level of the rural areas. 
The village and the city should approach each other in regard to 
life's amenities, so that in both there should be full opportunities 
for bodily and mental development and a full all-rounded life. 

That this can be done I have little doubt, provided only that 
people want to do it. At present there is no such widespread 
desire and our energies are diverted (apart from killing each 
other) in producing ersatz products and ersatz amusements. I 
have no basic objection to most of these, and some I think are 
definitely desirable, but they absorb the time that might often be 
better employed and give a wrong perspective to life. Artificial 
fertilisers are in great demand to-day and I suppose they do good 

*'L'art greco-bouddhique du Gandhara.' 
556 



in their own way. But it does seem odd to me that in their enthu- 
siasm for the artificial product, people should forget natural 
manure and even waste it and throw it away. Only China, as 
a nation, has had the good sense to make full use of the natural 
stuff. Some experts say that artificial fertilisers, though producing 
quick results, weaken the soil by depriving it of some essential 
ingredients, and thus the land grows progressively more sterile. 
With the earth, as with our individual lives, there is far too much 
of burning the candle at both ends. We take her riches from her 
at a prodigious pace and give little or nothing back. 

We are proud of our increasing ability to produce almost 
anything in the chemical laboratory. From the age of steam, we 
proceeded to that of electricity and now we are in an age of 
biotechnics and electronics. The age of social science, which 
we hope will solve many of the intimate problems that trouble 
us so much, looms ahead. We are also told that we are on the 
threshold of the magnesium-aluminium age and as both these 
metals are extremely abundant and universally distributed, there 
can be no lack for any one. The new chemistry is building a 
new life for mankind. We seem to be on the verge of increasing 
enormously the power resources of humanity and all manner of 
epoch-making discoveries hover over the near future. 

All this is very comforting and yet a doubt creeps into my 
mind. It is not lack of power that we suffer from but a misuse of 
the power we possess or not a proper application of it. Science 
gives power but remains impersonal, purposeless, and almost 
unconcerned with our application of the knowledge it puts at our 
disposal. It may continue its triumphs and yet, if it ignores nature 
too much, nature may play a subtle revenge upon it. While life 
seems to grow in outward stature, it may ebb away inside for lack 
of something yet undiscovered by science. 

The Modern Approach to an Old Problem 

The modern mind, that is to say the better type of the modern 
mind, is practical and pragmatic, ethical and social, altruistic and 
humanitarian. It is governed by a practical idealism for social 
betterment. The ideals which move it represent the spirit of the 
age, the Zeitgist, the Yugadharma. It has discarded to a large 
extent the philosophic approach of the ancients, their search for 
ultimate reality, as well as the devotionalism and mysticism of 
the medieval period. Humanity is its god and social service its 
religion. This conception may be incomplete, as the mind of 
every age has been limited by its environment, and every age 
has considered some partial truth as the key to all truth. Every 
generation and every people suffer from the illusion that their 

557 



way of looking at things is the only right way, or is, at any rate, 
the nearest approach to it. Every culture has certain values 
attached to it, limited and conditioned by that culture. The people 
governed by that culture take these values for granted and attri- 
bute a permanent validity to them. So the values of our present- 
day culture may not be permanent and final; nevertheless they 
have an essential importance for us for they represent the thought 
and spirit of the age we live in. A few seers and geniuses, looking 
into the future, may have a completer vision of humanity and 
the universe; they are ofthe vital stuff out of which all real advance 
comes. The vast majority of people do not even catch up to the 
present-day values, though they may talk about them in the jar- 
gon of the day, and they live imprisoned in the past. 

We have therefore to function in line with the highest ideals 
ofthe age we live in, though we may add to them or seek to mould 
them in accordance with our national genius. Those ideals may 
be classed under two heads: humanism and the scientific spirit. 
Between these two there has been an apparent conflict but the 
great upheaval of thought to-day, with its questioning of all values, 
is removing the old boundaries between these two approaches, 
as well as between the external world of science and the internal 
world of introspection. There is a growing synthesis between 
humanism and the scientific spirit, resulting in a kind of scientific 
humanism. Science also, while holding on to fact, is on the verge 
of other domains, or at any rate, has ceased to deny them contemp- 
tuously. Our five senses and what they can perceive, obviously, 
do not exhaust the universe. During the past twenty-five years 
there has been a profound change in the scientist's picture of the 
physical world. Science used to look at nature as something almost 
apart from man. But now, Sir James Jeans tells us that the essence 
of science is that 'man no longer sees nature as something distinct 
from himself And then the old question arises which troubled 
the thinkers of the Upanishads: how can the knower be known? 
How can the eyes that can see external objects see themselves? 
And if the external is part and parcel of the internal, what we 
perceive or conceive is but a projection of our minds, and the 
universe and nature and the soul and mind and body, the trans- 
cendent and the immanent are all essentially one, how then are 
we, within the limited framework of our minds to understand 
this mighty scheme of things objectively? Science has begun to 
touch these problems and though they may elude it, still the 
earnest scientist of to-day is the prototype of the philosopher and 
the man of religion of earlier ages. 'In this materialistic age of 
ours,' says Professor Albert Einstein, 'the serious scientific workers 
are the only profoundly religious people.'* 

*Fiffy years ago, Vivekananda regarded modern science as a manifestation ofthe real 
religious spirit, for it sought to understand truth by sincere effort. 

558 



In all this there appears to be a firm belief in science and yet 
an apprehension that purely factual and purposeless science is 
not enough. Was science, in providing so much of life's furniture, 
ignoring life's significance? There is an attempt to find a har- 
mony between the world of fact and the world of spirit, for it was 
becoming increasingly obvious that the over-emphasis on the 
former was crushing the spirit of man. The question that troubled 
the philosophers of old has come up again in a different form 
and context: How to reconcile the phenomenal life of the world 
with the inner spiritual life of the individual. The physicians have 
discovered that it is not enough to treat the body of the individual 
or of society as a whole. In recent years, medical men, familiar 
with the finding of modern psycho-pathology, have abandoned 
the antithesis between 'organic' and 'functional' diseases, and 
lay greater stress on the psychological factor. 'This is the greatest 
error in the treatment of sickness,' wrote Plato, 'that there are 
physicians for the body and physicians for the soul, and yet the 
two are one and indivisible.' 

Einstein, most eminent among scientists, tells us that 'the fate 
of the human race was more than ever dependent on its moral 
strength to-day. The way to a joyful and happy state is through 
renunciation and self-limitation everywhere.' He takes us back 
suddenly from this proud age of science to the old philosophers, 
from the lust for power and the profit moti\% to the spirit of 
renunciation with which India has been so familiar. Probably 
most other scientists of to-day will not agree with him in this 
or when he says: 'I am absolutely convinced that no wealth in 
the world can help humanity forward, even in the hands of the 
most devoted worker in the cause. The example of great and 
pure characters is the only thing that can produce fine ideas of 
noble deeds. Money only appeals to selfishness and always tempts 
its owners irresistibly to abuse it.' 

In facing this question, that is as old as civilization itself, 
modern science has many advantages denied to the old philoso- 
phers. It possesses stores of accumulated knowledge and a method 
which has abundantly justified itself. It has mapped and char- 
tered many regions which were unknown to the ancients. As it 
has enlarged man's understanding and control over many things, 
they have ceased to be mysteries to be exploited by the priests of 
religion. But it has some disadvantages also. The very abundance 
of its accumulated knowledge has made it difficult for man to take 
a synthetic view of the whole, and he loses himself in some part of 
it, analyses it, studies it, partly understands it, and fails to see its 
connection with the whole. The vast forces science has released 
overwhelm him and carry him forward relentlessly, and often an 
unwilling victim, to unknown shores. The pace of modern life, 

559 



the succession of crisis after crisis, comes in the way of a dispas- 
sionate search for truth. Wisdom itself is hustled and pushed about 
and cannot easily discover that calm and detached out-look 
which is so necessary for true understanding. 'For still are the 
ways of wisdom and her temper trembleth not.' 

Perhaps we are living in one of the great ages of mankind and 
have to pay the price for that privilege. The great ages have 
been full of conflict and ihstability, of an attempt to change 
over from the old to something new. There is no permanent 
stability or security or changelessness; if there were life itself 
would cease. At the most we can seek a relative stability and a 
moving equilibrium. Life is a continuous struggle of man against 
man, of man against his surroundings, a struggle on the physical, 
intellectual, and moral plane out of which new things take 
shape and fresh ideas are born. Destruction and construction 
go side by side and both aspects of man and nature are ever 
evident. Life is a principle of growth, not of standing still, a 
continuous becoming, which does not permit static conditions. 

To-day, in the world of politics and economics there is a search 
for power and yet when power is attained much else of value has 
gone. Political trickery and intrigue take the place of idealism, 
and cowardice and selfishness the place of disinterested courage. 
Form prevails over substance, and power, so eagerly sought after, 
somehow fails tofcchieve what it aimed at. For power has its 
limitations, and force recoils on itself. Neither can control the 
spirit, though they may harden and coarsen it. 'You can rob an 
army of its general,' says Confucius, 'but not the least of men of 
his will.' 

John Stuart Mill wrote in his autobiography: 'I am now con- 
vinced that no great improvements in the lot of mankind are 
possible, until a great change takes place in the fundamental 
constitution of their modes of thought.' And yet that fundamen- 
tal change in the modes of thought itself comes from a changing 
environment and the pain and suffering that accompany life's 
unceasing struggles. And so, though we may try to change those 
modes of thought directly, it is even more necessary to change 
the environment in which they grew and found sustenance. Each 
depends on and influences the other. There is an endless variety 
of men's minds. Each one sees the truth in his own way and is 
often unable to appreciate another's viewpoint. Out of this comes 
conflict. Out of this interaction also a fuller and more integrated 
truth emerges. For we have to realize that truth is many-sided 
and is not the monopoly of any group or nation. So also the way 
of doing things. There may be different ways for different people 
in different situations. India and China, as well as other nations, 
evolved their own ways of life and gave them an enduring 

560 



foundation. They imagined, and many among them vainly 
imagine Still, that their way is the only way. To-day, Europe 
and America have evolved their own way of life, which is 
dominant in the world, and which, their people imagine, is the 
only way. But probably none of these ways is the one and only 
desirable way and each may learn something from the other. 
Certainly India and China must learn a great deal, for they had 
become static and the west not only represents the spirit of the 
age but is dynamic and changing and has the capacity for growth 
in it, even though this functions through self-destruction and 
periodical human sacrifice. 

In India, and perhaps in other countries also, there are alter- 
nating tendencies for self-glorification and self-pity. Both are 
undesirable and ignoble. It is not through sentimentality and 
emotional approaches that we can understand life, but by a 
frank and courageous facing of realities. We cannot lose oursel- 
ves in aimless and romantic quests unconnected with life's pro- 
blems, for destiny marches on and does not wait for our leisure. 
Nor can we concern ourselves with externals only, forgetting the 
significance of the inner life of man. There has to be a balance, 
an attempt at harmony between them. 'The greatest good,' wrote 
Spinoza in the seventeenth century, 'is the knowledge of the 
union which the mind has with the whole of nature. . . .The 
more the mind knows the better it understands its forces and the 
order of nature; the more it undrestands its forces or strength, the 
better it will be able to direct itself and lay down rules for itself; 
and the more it understands the order of nature the more easily 
it will be able to liberate itself from useless things; this is the whole 
method.' 

In our individual lives also we have to discover a balance 
between the body and the spirit, and between man as part of 
nature and man as part of society. 'For our perfection,' says 
Tagore, 'we have to be vitally savage and mentally civilized; 
we should have the gift to be natural with nature and human 
with human society.' Perfection is beyond us for it means the 
end, and we are always journeying, trying to approach some- 
thing that is ever receding. And in each one of us are many 
different human beings with their inconsistencies and contra- 
dictions, each pulling in a different direction. There is the love 
of life and the disgust with life, the acceptance of all that life 
involves and the rejection of much of it. It is difficult to harmo- 
nize these contrary tendencies, and sometimes one of them is 
dominant and sometimes another. 

'Oftentimes,' says Lao Tzu: 

Oftentimes, one strips oneself of passion 
In order to see the Secret of Life; 

561 



Oftentimes, one regards life with passion, 
In order to see its manifold results. 

For all our powers of reason and understanding and all our 
accumulated knowledge and experience, we know little enough 
about life's secrets, and can only guess at its mysterious processes. 
But we can always admire its beauty and, through art, exercise 
the god-like function of creation. Though we may be weak and 
erring mortals, living a brief and uncertain span of life, yet there 
is something of the stuff of the immortal gods in us. 'We must 
not,' therefore, says Aristotle, 'obey those who urge us, because 
we are human and mortal, to think human and mortal thoughts; 
in so far as we may we should practise immortality, and omit 
no effort to live in accordance with the best that is in us.' 

Epilogue 

Nearly five months have gone by since I took to this writing 
and I have covered a thousand hand-written pages with this 
jumble of ideas in my mind. For five months I have travelled in 
the past and peeped into the future and sometimes tried to 
balance myself on that 'point of intersection of the timeless with 
time.' These months have been full of happenings in the world 
and the war has advanced rapidly towards a triumphant con- 
clusion, so far as military victories go. In my own country also 
much has happened of which I could be only a distant spectator, 
and waves of unhappiness have sometimes temporarily swept 
over me and passed on. Because of this business of thinking and 
trying to give some expression to my thoughts, I have drawn 
myself away from the piercing edge of the present and moved 
along the wider expanses of the past and the future. 

But there must be an end to this wandering. If there was no 
other sufficient reason for it, there is a very practical considera- 
tion which cannot be ignored. I have almost exhausted the 
supply of paper that I had managed to secure after considerable 
difficulty and it is not easy to get more of it. 

The discovery of India — what have I discovered? It was pre- 
sumptuous of me to imagine that I could unveil her and find 
out what she is to-day and what she was in the long past. To-day 
she is four hundred million separate individual men and women, 
each differing from the other, each living in a private universe 
of though A and feeling. If this is so in the present, how much 
more difficult is it to grasp that multitudinous past of innumer- 
able successions of human beings. Yet something has bound 
them together and binds them still. India is a geographical and 
economic entity, a cultural unity amidst diversity, a bundle of 
contradictions held together by strong but invisible threads. 

562 



Overwhelmed again and again, her spirit was never conquered, 
and to-day when she appears to be the plaything of a proud 
conqueror, she remains unsubdued and unconquered. About her 
there is the elusive quality of a legend of long ago; some en- 
chantment seems to have held her mind. She is a myth and an 
idea, a dream and a vision, and yet very real and present and 
pervasive. There are terrifying glimpses of dark corridors which 
seem to lead back to primeval night, but also there is the full- 
ness and warmth of the day about her. Shameful and repellent 
she is occasionally, perverse and obstinate, sometimes even a 
little hysteric, this lady with a past. But she is very lovable, and 
none of her children can forget her wherever they go or what- 
ever strange fate befalls them. For she is part of them in her 
greatness as well as her failings, and they are mirrored in those 
deep eyes of hers that have seen so much of life's passion and 
joy and folly, and looked down into wisdom'-s well. Each one of 
them is drawn to her, though perhaps each has a different reason 
for that attraction or can point to no reason at all, and each 
sees some different aspect of her many-sided personality. From 
age to age she has produced great men and women, carrying on 
the old tradition and yet ever adapting it to changing times. 
Rabindranath Tagore, in line with that great succession, was 
full of the temper and urges of the modern age and yet was 
rooted in India's past, and in his own self built up a synthesis 
of the old and the new. 'I love India,' he said, 'not because I 
cultivate the idolatry of geography, not because I have had the 
chance to be born in her soil but because she has saved through 
tumultuous ages the living words that have issued from the illu- 
minated consciousness of her great ones.' So many will say, while 
others will explain their love for her in some different way. 

The old enchantment seems to be breaking to-day and she is 
looking around and waking up to the present. But however she 
changes, as change she must, that old witchery will continue and 
hold the hearts of her people. Though her attire may change, 
she will continue as of old, and her store of wisdom will help 
her to hold on to what is true and beautiful and good in this 
harsh, vindictive, and grasping world. 

The world of to-day has achieved much, but for all its declared 
love for humanity, it has based itself far more on hatred and 
violence than on the virtues that make man human. War is the 
negation of truth and humanity. War may be unavoidable some- 
times, but its progeny are terrible to contemplate. Not mere 
killing, for man must die, but the deliberate and persistent pro- 
pagation of hatred and falsehood, which gradually become the 
normal habits of the people. It is dangerous and harmful to be 
guided in our life's course by hatreds and aversions, for they 

563 



are wasteful of energy and limit and twist the mind and prevent 
it from perceiving the truth. Unhappily there is hatred to-day in 
India and strong aversions, for the past pursues us and the pre- 
sent does not differ from it. It is not easy to forget repeated 
affronts to the dignity of a proud race. Yet, fortunately, Indians 
do not nourish hatred for long; they recover easily a more bene- 
volent mood. 

India will find herself again when freedom opens out new 
horizons, and the future will then fascinate her far more than 
the immediate past of frustration and humiliation. She will go 
forward with confidence, rooted in herself and yet eager to learn 
from others and co-operate with them. To-day she swings 
between a blind adherence to her old customs and a slavish 
imitation of foreign ways. In neither of these can she find relief 
or life or growth. It is obvious that she has to come out of her 
shell and take full part in the life and activities of the modern 
age. It should be equally obvious- that there can be no real 
cultural or spiritual growth based on imitation. Such imitation 
can only be confined to a small number which cuts itself off 
from the masses and the springs of national life. True culture 
derives its inspiration from every corner of the world but it if 
home-grown and has to be based on the wide mass of the people. 
Art and literature remain lifeless if they are continually thinking 
of foreign models. The day of a narrow culture confined to a 
small fastidious group is past. We have to think in terms of the 
people generally, and their culture must be a continuation and 
development of past trends, and must also represent their new 
urges and creative tendencies. 

Emerson, over 100 years ago, warned his countrymen in America 
not to imitate or depend too much culturally on Europe. A new 
people as they were, he wanted them not to look back on their 
European past but to draw inspiration from the abounding life of 
their new country. 'Our day of dependence, our long apprenticeship 
to the learning of other lands, draws to a close. The millions that 
around us are rushing into life cannot always be fed on the sere 
remains of foreign harvests. Events, actions arise, that must be 
sung, that will sing themselves. . . there are creative manners, there 
are creative actions and creative words. ..that is, indicative of no 
custom or authority, but springing spontaneous from the mind's 
own sense of good and fair.' And again in his essay on self-reliance: 
'It is for want of self-culture that the superstition of travelling, 
whose idols are Italy, England, Egypt, retains its fascination for 
all educated Americans. They who made England, Italy, or Greece 
venerable in the imagination did so by sticking fast where they 
were, like an axis of the earth. In manly hours we feel that duty is 
our place. The soul is no traveller; the wise man stays at home, and 

564 



when his necessities, his duties, on any occasion call him from 
his house, or into foreign fields, he is at home still, and shall 
make men sensible by the expression of his countenance that he 
goes the missionary of wisdom and virtue, and visits cities and 
men like a sovereign and not like an interloper or a valet.' 

'I have no churlish objection,' continues Emerson, 'to the cir- 
cum-navigation of the globe, for the purposes of art, of study, 
and benevolence, so that man is first domesticated, or does not 
go abroad with the hope of finding something greater than he 
knows. He who travels to be amused, or to get somewhat which 
he does not carry, travels away from himself, and grows old even 
in youth among old things. In Thebes, in Palmyra, his will and 
mind have become old and dilapidated as they. He carries ruins 
to ruins. 

'But the rage for travelling is a symptom of a deeper unsound- 
ness affecting the whole intellectual action We imitate 

Our houses are built with foreign taste; our shelves are garnished 
with foreign ornaments; our opinions, our tastes, our faculties, 
lean on and follow the past and the distant. The soul created 
the arts wherever they have flourished. It was in his own mind 
that the artist sought his model. It was an application of his 
own thought to the thing to be done and the conditions to be 

observed Insist on yourself; never imitate. Your own gift you 

can present every moment with the cumulative force of a whole 
life's cultivation; but of the adopted talent of another you have 
only an extemporaneous half possession.' 

We in India do not have to go abroad in search of the past 
and the distant. We have them here in abundance. If we go to 
foreign countries it is in search of the present. That search is 
necessary, for isolation from it means backwardness and decay. 
The world of Emerson's time has changed and old barriers are 
breaking down; life becomes more international. We have to 
play our part in this coming internationalism and, for this pur- 
pose, to travel, meet others, learn from them and understand 
them. But a real internationalism is not something in the air 
without roots or anchorage. It has to grow out of national 
cultures and can only flourish to-day on a basis of freedom and 
equality and true internationalism. Nevertheless Emerson's warn- 
ing holds to-day as it did in the past, and our search can only 
be fruitful in the conditions mentioned by him. Not to go any- 
where as interlopers, but only if we are welcomed as equals and 
as comrades in a common quest. There are countries, notably in 
the British dominions, which try to humiliate our countrymen. 
They are not for us. We may, for the present, have to suffer the 
enforced subjection to an alien yoke and to carry the grievous 
burdens that this involves, but the day of our liberation cannot 

565 



be distant. We are citizens of no mean country and we are proud 
of the land of our birth, of our people, our culture and tradi- 
tions. That pride should not be for a romanticised past to which 
we want to cling; nor should it encourage exclusiveness or a 
want of appreciation of other ways than ours. It must never allow 
us to forget our many weaknesses and failings or blunt our long- 
ing to be rid of them. We have a long way to go and much lee- 
way to make up before we can take our proper station with 
others in the van of human civilization and progress. And we 
have to hurry, for the time at our disposal is limited and the 
pace of the world grows ever swifter. It was India's way in the 
past to welcome and absorb other cultures. That is much more 
necessary to-day, for we march to the one world of to-morrow 
where national cultures will be intermingled with the inter- 
national culture of the human race. We shall therefore seek 
wisdom and knowledge and friendship and comradeship wher- 
ever we can find them, and co-operate with others in common 
tasks, but we are no suppliants for others' favours and patronage. 
Thus we shall remain true Indians and Asiatics, and become at 
the same time good internationalists and world citizens. 

My generation has been a troubled one in India and the world. 
We may carry on for a little while longer, but our day will be 
over and we shall give place to others, and they will live their 
lives arid carry their burdens to the next stage of the journey. 
How have we played our part in this brief interlude that draws 
to a close? I do not know. Others of a later age will judge. By 
what standards do we measure success or failure? That too I do 
not know. We can make no complaint that life has treated us 
harshly, for ours has been a willing choice, and perhaps life has 
not been so bad to us after all. For only they can sense life who 
stand often on the verge of it, only they whose lives are not 
governed by the fear of death. In spite of all the mistakes that 
we may have made, we have saved ourselves from triviality and 
an inner shame and cowardice. That, for our individual selves, 
has been some achievement. 'Man's dearest possession is life, and 
since it is given to him to live but once, he must so live as not 
to be seared with the shame of a cowardly and trivial past, so 
live as not to be tortured for years without purpose, so live that 
dying he can say: "All my life and my strength were given to 
the first cause of the world — the liberation of mankind." '* 



*J.'icoli Ostrovsky. 
5 66 



POSTSCRIPT 
Allahabad 29th December 1945 



DURING MARCH AND APRIL, 1945, THE MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESS 

Working Committee, interned in Ahmadnagar Fort prison camp, 
were dispersed and sent to their respective provinces. The camp 
jail was wound up and presumably reverted to the military 
authorities. Three of us — Govind Ballabh Pant, Narendra Deva, 
and I — left Ahmadnagar Fort on March 28th and were brought 
to Naini Central Prison where we met a number of our old 
colleagues, among whom was Rafi Ahmad Kidwai. For the first 
time since our arrest in August, 1942, we had an opportunity 
of having first-hand accounts of some of the occurrences of 1942, 
for many of those in Naini Prison had been arrested some time 
after us A From Naini we three were taken to Izatnagar Central 
-ftwwr; near Bareilly. Govind Ballabh Pant was released on 
account of ill-health. Narendra Deva and I lived together in a 
barrack in this prison for over two months. Early in June we 
were transferred to the mountain prison of Almora, which I had 
known so intimately ten years earlier. On June 15th we were 
both discharged, 1,041 days after our arrest in August, 1942. 
Thus ended my ninth and longest term of imprisonment. 

Since then six months and a half have passed. I came from the 
long seclusion of prison to crowds, intense activity and conti- 
nuous travelling. I spent only a night at home and then hurried 
to Bombay for a meeting of the Congress Working Committee. 
And then to the Simla Conference convened by the Viceroy. I 
found it a little difficult to adjust myself to the new and chang- 
ing environment and could not easily fit in. Though everything 
was familiar and it was good to meet old friends and colleagues, 
I felt somewhat as a stranger and an outsider, and my mind wan- 
dered to mountains and snow-covered peaks. As soon as the 
Simla business was over I hurried to Kashmir. I did not stay 
in the valley, but almost immediately started on a trek to the 
higher regions and passes. For a month I was in Kashmir and 
then I came back to the crowds and the excitements and bore- 
doms of everyday life. 

Gradually some picture of the past three years formed itself 
in my mind. I found, as others did, that what had taken place 

567 



was far more than we had imagined. These three years had been 
a time of heavy travail for our people and each person we met 
bore the mark of it on his face. India had changed and under 
the seeming quiet of the surface there was doubt and question- 
ing, frustration and anger, and a suppressed passion. With our 
release and the turn events took, a change came over the scene. 
The smooth surface was ruffled and cracks appeared. Waves of 
exitemqnt passed across the country; after three years of sup- 
pression, the people broke through that shell. I had not pre- 
viously seen such crowds, such "frenzied excitement, such a 
passionate desire on the part of masses of people to free them- 
selves. Young men and women, boys and girls, were afire with 
the urge to do something, though what they should do was not 
clear to them. 

The War ended and the atom bomb became the symbol of 
the new age. The use of this bomb and the tortuous ways of 
power politics brought further disillusion. The old imperialisms 
still functioned, and events in Indonesia and Indo-China added 
to the horror of the scene. The use of Indian troops in both 
these countries against people struggling to be free brought 
shame to us at our helplessness and an abiding anger and bitter- 
ness. The temper of the country continued to rise. 

The story of the Indian National Army, formed in Burma 
and Malaya during war years, spread suddenly throughout the 
country and evoked an astonishing enthusiasm. The trial by 
court martial of some of its officers aroused the country as nothing 
else had done, and they became the symbols of India fighting 
for her freedom. They became also the symbol of unity among 
the various religious groups in India, for Hindu and Moslem and 
Sikh and Christian were all represented in that army. They had 
solved the communal problem amongst themselves, and so why 
should we not do so? 

We are on the eve of general elections in India and these 
elections absorb attention. But the elections will be over soon — 
and then? The coming year is likely to be one of storm and 
trouble, of conflict and turmoil. There is going to be no peace 
in India or elsewhere except on the basis of freedom. 



568 



INDEX 



Abbasiya Khalifas, 229 

Abdul Hamid, Sultan, 346 

Abdul Rahim Khankhana, 260, 

269 
Abend, Hallet, 504n 
Abdur-Razzak, 240 
Abhidharmakosa, 173n 
Abu Nasr Farabi, 233 
Abyssinia, 18, 47, 418, 421 
Adams, Brooke, quoted, 297-98 
Adil Sha, Ibrahim, 161 
Advaita Ashrama, 339n 
Advaita Vedanta, 28, 32, 189-90, 
337 

Afghan(istan), 141, 142, 213, 227, 
229, 234, 237-39, 241-43, 248, 
258-59, 264, 417, 421, 536 

Afghan Period, 147, 160, 167, 198, 
237-39, 241-43, 249 

Africa, 227, 228, 332, 421 

Africa, future of, 537, 544, 546-47 

Aga Khan, 346, 354, 

Agra, 51, 58, 258 

Agra, battle of, 276 

Agriculture, ancient, 111, 299-301 
National Congress, and, 371 

Ahimsa, 108, 187 

Ahmad, Dr. Nazir, 346 

Ahmadnagar Fort, 15, 35, 240, 
478-79, 567 

Ahmad Nizam Shah, 240 

Ahmad Shah Durrani, 274 

Ahmedabad, 331, 485 

Ahrars, 386, 393 

Aibak, Qutb-ud-Din, 238 

Ailerya Brahmana, 91 

Aiyar, Sir C. P. Ramaswami, quoted, 
527-28n 

Ajanta frescoes, 153, 203, 213 



Akbar, Emperor, 35, 52, 142, 242, 

257-61, 263-65, 269-71, 344 
Akhand Hindustan, 532 
Akkad, 70 

Al Ahzar University, Cairo, 347 
Alaric, the Goth, 215 
Al-Balagh, 349 
Alberuni, 156, 234-35 
Albuquerque, 207, 260 
Alcestis, 163n 
Alcibiades, quoted, 359-60 
Alexander the Great, 98, 114-15, 

122-23 
Alexandria, 154, 216 
Al-Hilal, 347-50 
Alice in Wonderland, 100 
Aligarh College, 345, 348, 354 
Ali, Maulana Mohammad, 349 
Ali, Munshi Karamat, 346 
Ali, Shaukat, 349 
Ali, Syed Chirag, 346 
Al-Khwarismi, 232 
Allahabad, 39, 42, 51, 325 
Al-Mansur, Khalif, 220, 232 
Almora Jail, 39, 567 
Amarji, Ranchodji, 235n 
Amarnath Cave, 192 
Ambala, 70 

Americans in India, see U.S.A. 

Amery, Leopold, 438, 461, 490, 496 

Amaravati University, 223 

Amritsar massacre, 325, 340 

Ananda, 130 

Ananga, 101 

Ancient Indian Colonies, 20 1 n 

Andhra(s), 61, 132 

Angkor, 51, 201, 204, 205, 208-09 

Annam, 205 

Ansari, Dr. M.A., 347 

Antigonus, 115 

569 



Antiochus, 132 

Anuradhapura, 211 

Anushirwan, Khusrau, lOOn 

Apastamba, 219 

Appollonius, 155, 217 

Arabian Nights, 100 

Arabic, 228 

Arabs, 102, 142, 213, 216, 220, 

227-34, 242 
Archimedes, 217 
Architecture, 148, 208, 265 
Arcos raid, 416 
Argentine, 543 

Aristotle, 150, 184, 232, 233, 562 
Aijuna, 109 
Army, Indian, 305, 329, 444, 461, 

National, 568 
Army, Maratha, 278 
Arnold, Edwin, 130 
Aronson, Alex, 159n 
Arrian, quoted, 119 
Art, 204, 210-14, 265 
Arthashastra, 97, 117, 123, 125-26, 141 
Arthur King, 100 
Aryabhata, 220,221 
Aryadesha, 74, 197 
Arya dharma, 74 
'Aryan Path', 74 
Arya Samaj, 335 

Aryans, 73, 85-86, 106-07, 111, 118, 
143; literature of, 79-81; and 
Vedas, 79-82 
Aryavarta, 107, 209 
Asanas, 186-87 

Ashoka, Emperor, 52, 115, 122, 
132-35, 176, 180; Ashoka tree, 101 
Ashvaghosa, 158 
Asia, 54, 260, 263 

Chengiz Khan and, 230-31; 
Indian colonies in, 200-07 and 
Indian freedom, 492; Indian influ- 
ence on, 50-51, 114, 124, 148-49, 
155-56, 209-10; Mongol Conquest 
of, 230-32 
Assam, 61, 169, 192, 368, 432 
Astrakhan, 264n 
Astronomy, 156, 215, 232 
Atal, Dr. M., 46 
Ataturk, 350 



Athens, 549-50 

Atlantic Charter, 20, 442, 538 

Atman, 189 

Attila, 139 

Aurungzeb, 254n, 265, 270-73, 283, 

343 
Australia(ns), 55, 410, 421, 424, 545 
Automobile Industry, 411 
Autonomy, provincial, 366-69, 373, 

village, 248, 523 
Average Income, 397-98 
Averroes, 233 
Avesta, 74, 77, 146 
Avicenna, 233 
Azad, Maulana Abul Kalam, 346- 

50, 435, 447, 462, 478 
Azad Muslim Conference, 386 

B 

Babar, 148, 231, 257-59 

Babylon, 113, 147 

Bacon, Francis, quoted, 263 

Bactrians, 136, 143 

Badami, 213 

Badrinath, 191 

Bagchi, Dr. P. C, 196n 

Baghdad, 220, 229, 230, 232-34 

Bahadur Shah, 324 

Bahmani Kingdom, 239, 259 

Bai, Princess Ahalya, 278 

Bai, Lakshmi, 324 

Bain, F. W., 105 

Baji Rao I, Peshwa, 278 

Baladitya, 139 

Bali, 201, 207 

Balkan Wars, 347, 349, 350 

Balkh, 177, 194, 230 

Baluchistan, 63 

Banking System, 284 

Barmak Family (Barmecides), 232 

Baroda, 307; population of, 309n 

Batuta, Ibn, 198, 239 

Baudhayana, 219 

Beard, Charles and Mary, quoted, 

286 
Benares, 113, 117, 192, 223, 316 
Bengal(is), 16, 58, 61, 192, 198, 203, 
243, 267, 275, 285, 295-97, 304, 
314-20, 322, 328, 331, 367-68, 



570 



370, 371, 375, 413, 430, 431, 464, 
489, 490, 495-99, 529, 535, 544 

Bengal Administration Enquiry Com- 
mittee, 493n 

Bengal Asiastic Society, 317 

Bentinck, Lord, quoted, 299, 304 

Bergson, Henry, quoted, 477 

Besanagar, 136 

Besant, Mrs. Annie, 341 

Bhagalpur, 223 

Bhagavad Gita, 77, 93, 107, 108-09, 
170 

Bhairu, 240 

Bharata, 59 

Bharat Mala, 59-60 

Bharatvarsha, 107, 138 

Bhasa, 158 

Bhaskara, 219 

Bhavabhuti, 160 

Bhoja, Mihira, 222 

Bhopal, 307 

Bibi, Chand, 35, 240 

Bihar, 127, 177, 243, 275, 296-97, 
304, 323, 371, 403, 489, 495 

Bijapur, 16 

Bikanir, 307 

Bindusara, 132, 155 

Binyon, Lawrence, 212 

Birbal, 100, 260 

Birdwood, Sir George, quoted, 247 

Birth rate, 551-54 

'Bloody Assizes', 325 

Bloomfield, quoted, 92 

Bodhisattva(s), 156 

Bohras, 332, 334 

Bokhara, 148, 230 

Bombay, 294-95, 316, 322, 331, 

371, 411; slums, 356 
Borneo, 202, 205, 210 
Borobudur, 51, 201 

Bose, Subhas Chandra, 422, 469 
Brahmagupta, 219 
Brahmaputra River, 51 
Brahmimsm, 179-80, 183-92, 206; 

and Buddhism, 174-80; ten orders 

of, 190 
Brahmins, 85, 86, 117, 164, 174, 177, 

216, 253, 332 
Brahmi script, 115 



Brahmo Samaj, 335 

Branson, Clive, quoted, 488 

Brindaban, 192 

Britain (British) conquest of India, 

273-82; in World War II, 416-78; 

future of, 543-50; and Russia, 

416-17 
British Indian Association, 319 
British Museum, 214 
'British paramountcy', 312 
Broach, 113 

Browne, Sir Thomas, quoted, 263 
Buckingham, James Silk, 316 
Buck, Pearl, 39 
Buddha(ism), 83, 92, 94, 98, 111-17, 

119-20, 127-34, 153, 156, 170-80, 

203, 204; absorbed by Hinduism, 

178-80; in China, 192-99; nature 

of, 83; and Samkhya, 185-86; 

spread of, 122 
Buddhabhadra, 193 
Buddha Charila, 158 
Buddha Gaya, 192 
Buddhist Art in Siam, 210 
Burma, 134, 169, 202, 203, 204, 210, 

335, 423, 440, 463; separation from 

India, 440 
Butler Committee, 310 



Cairo, 230, 239, 

Calcutta, 296, 333; famine, 495-99; 

Madrasa, 316 
Calicut, 259, 260 
Cambodia, 167, 201-08 
Cambridge History of India, 113n, 114n 
Canada(ians), 410, 421, 503, 545 
Canarese, 61 

Cape Comorin, 60, 190, 339 
Capitalism, 515 
Cartwright, 298 
Caste System, 245-48, 250-56, 268, 

337, 506, 520 
Cawnpore, 324, 325, 375, 377, 486" 
Celebes, 202, 205 
Censorship, 378, 491 
Ceylon, 113, 137, 169, 202, 205, 

211, 332, 336n, 536 
Chaitanya, 336 



571 



Chalukyan Empire, 139 

Chamberlain, Neville, 438 

Champa, 113, 201, 205, 207 

ChSnakya, 122-25, 141, 163 

Chandragupta, 98, 115, 122-25 

Chandragupta II, 159 

Charak, 116 

Charles II, 271 

Chatterjee, B. R., 208n 

Chauhan, Prithvi Raj, 237 

Chengiz Khan, 230-31 

Childe, Gordon, quoted, 50, 71-72 

Civilizations of the East, 20 7n 

Clay Cart, the 160 

Clemenceau Georges, 537 

Clive, Robert, 275, 297; quoted, 285 

Cochin, 307-307n 

Colonies, Indian, 196, 200-10, 241 

Communal Problem, 381-82, 462 

Communist Party, 434, 516-17 

Comrade, The, 347, 349 

Conception of Buddhist Nirvana, The, 172n 

Confucius, 170, 199; quoted, 560 

Constantinople, 230, 239, 275, 537 

Constitution Act (1935), 301 

Conti, Nicolo, 240 

Cordoba, 230, 233 

Corporation of the Fifteen Hundred, 

203 
Cotton, 70 
Craft Guilds, 113 
Craft Villages, 113-14, 
Creative Evolution, 477 
Criminal Investigation Department, 

378 
Cripps, Sir Stafford, 447, 453-63, 

482 
Crompton, 298 
Cromwell, 271 
Crusades, 229 
Cutth, 332 
Cyrene, 133 

Cyrus the Great, 147-48 
Czechoslovakia, 19, 20, 418, 424 



D 



Dacca, 285 

Damascus, 228, 229, 261 

Darius, 147 



Darmsteler, James, quoted, 148 

Darrow, Karl K., quoted, 32 

Darshanas, 1 83 

Darwin, Charles, 116 

Davids, Mrs. C. A. F. Rhys, 114n 

quoted, 171, 179 
Davids, Prof. Rhys, 114n 
Dayananda, 336, 343 
Deccan, 136, 452 
Defence of India Act, 435, 437 

469, 500 
Dehra Dun Jail, 33, 34, 35 
Delhi, 51, 107, 231, 235, 237-44 

273, 324; Afghans in, 238-41 

massacres, 325; observatory, 283, 

Sultanate, 239, 244 
Demetrius, 115 
De Montmorency, Sir Geoffrey 

457n 
Determinism, 21 
Dhanwantari, 115 
Dharma, 87, 107, 133, 189 
Dharmaraksha, 193 
'Digit of the Moon', The, 105 
Dilli, 107 
Dm, Saif-ud, 198 
Disarmament Conference, 417 
Diwan-i-Am, 270 
Diwan-i-Khas, 270 
Dodds, E. R., quoted, 150 
Dodwell, quoted, 73, 143 
Dravidian (s), 72, 73, 84, 111 
Dundee, 331 
Dunkirk, 435, 471 
Dutch East Indies, 417 
Dutch Empire, 544 
Dvaita, 185 
Dvarka, 191 



East India Co., 199, 273, 275, 276-77 
279-80, 284-87, 292, 298, 318 
322, 327 

Economist, 419 

Egypt, 70, 416, 417, 492, 536, 543 
564 

Eightfold Path, 130 

Einstein, Albert, quoted, 558-59 

Eire, 17 



572 



Election Manifesto, 373 

Elections, 64-66; Cripps proposal on, 

453-55 
Elephanta Caves, 51, 214 
Eliot, Sir Charles, quoted, 200 
Ellora Caves, 51, 213 
Emerson, quoted, 564-65 
Epics, The, 99-106 
Epirus, 133 
Epstein, 214 

Escape with Me, 208, 212 
Euclid, 232 
Europe, 210, 261, 262-63; Asia's 

attitude to, 211; India and, 148-49; 

Postwar Market, 542-43; race 

barriers in, 251 



Fa-Hien (Fa-hsien), 180, 193, 254 

Family System, Joint, 247-48, 255 

Famine, 16-17, 297, 413, 464, 495-98, 
535 

Famine Inquiry Commission, 496n, 
498-99n 

Farabi, Abu Nasr, 233 

Far East, India and, 200-10 

Farnavis, Nana, 278 

Fascism, 47 

Fatehpur-Sikri, 52 

Fazl, Abul, 260, 264n 

Fazl, Fyzee, 260 

Federation of International Fellow- 
ships, 362n 

Fedorovitch, Tsar Michael, 264n 

Ferdinand (Spain), 230 

Ferghana, 258 

Feroze Shah, 241, 324 

Fick, Richard, 11 In, 112 

Fin-Shien, 198 

Firdausi, 114, 235 

Ford, Henry, 406 

Formosa, 202 

Foucher, M., quoted, 555 

Four Freedoms, 17, 20, 442 

France (French), 227, 275, 435, 
439, 469, 544, 552; Revolution, 
238, 382 

Franco, General, 538 



Gaekwar~of Baroda, 275 

Gama, Vasco da, 260 

Gandhara (Afghanistan), 98, 107, 

113, 136, 202 
Gandhari, 107 

Gandhi(ji), 28, 38, 47, 87, 93, 109, 
121, 243, 340-41, 358-64, 385, 
402, 404-07, 420, 437, 438, 441, 
442-47, 451-53, 457, 463, 472-76, 
484, 549 

Ganesha, 220 

Ganges, 48, 51; (Ganges River Com- 
mission), 375 

Gangetic Valley, 70, 73, 300, 375, 
405 

Garbe, Richard, quoted, 184 

Garret, G.T., 297, 326n 

Gaya, 130, 134 

General Elections, 64-66 

Geography, effects of, on history, 452 

Geopolitics, 539 

George III, 287 

German(y), 198, 412, 417, 422, 
539, 551, 552 

Ghalib, 346 

Ghazni, 235 

Ghias-ud-Din, Sultan, 198, 241, 250 

Ghosal, U.N., 210n 

Ghose, Aurobmdo, 21, 96, 109, 188, 
511 

Ghuri, Shahab-ud-Din, 237 

Giornale d'ltalia, 47 

Gladstone, W.E., 262 

Glimpses of World History, 23 

Gnosticism, 155 

Goa, 260 

Gobi Desert, 195 

Goethe, 101, 158 

Gokhale, Gopal Krishna, 291, 353 

Government of India Act (1935), 309, 
371, 424, 426, 430 

Grady Committee, 414 

Greater India, 201 

Greece (Greeks), 85, 89, 102, 105, 

114, 115, 118, 122, 142, 143, 
150-56, 216, 217, 233, 549, 555 

Greeks, Indo-, 136, 142 

Grousset, Rene, quoted, 148, 195, 207 

573 



Gujrat(is), 61, 270, 331, 333, 452, 

Gulbarga, 239 

Gupta Period, 148, 159, 213, 223 

Guptas, 140 

Gupta Script, 114 

Gurkhas, 276, 279, 324, 489 

Gwalior, 275, 278, 307 

H 

Haider AH, 274, 275, 276, 278 

Haldane, Prof., J.B.S., 553 

Hall, 346 

Halifax, Lord, 461 

Halsted, G. B., quoted, 217n 

Harappa, 69, 72 

Hardwar, 51, 192 

Hargreaves, 298 

Harsha (vardhana), 139, 160, 193, 

195, 222, 227 
Hartals, 485, 486 
Harun-al-Rashid, 232, 261 
Hastinapur, 107 
Hastings, Lord, 323 
Hastings, Warren, 272, 273 
Havell, E.B., 182, 212, 214, 224, 

250 
Hegel, 172n 

Heliodorus Column, 136 
Herat, 123, 230, 234, 284 
Herodotus, quoted, 147 
Herrenvolk theory, 326 
Himalayas, 51, 61, 63, 104, 153, 

192, 533 
HmaySna Buddhism, 137, 173-74, 

177 
Hindi language, 76, 168-69, 244, 

269, 317 
Hindi-Urdu, 169 
'Hindu', meaning of, 74-76, 197 
Hindu College, 318 
Hinduism, 107, 121, 138, 179, 208; 
analysed, 74-76; and Buddhism, 
174-80, effect of Afghan conquest 
on, 242; Islam and, 244, 265-70; 
reforms in, 335-36 
Hindu Mahasabha, 387, 392 
Hindu Scriptures, 8 On 
Hindusthani language, 64 
Hitler, Adolf, 326, 416, 442, 484, 



494n, 552 
Hogben, Prof., quoted, 218 
Holi, 154 
Holland, 419 
Holkar, 275 
Hooghli River, 196 
Hopkins, Prof. E. Washburn, 113n 
HsuanTsang, 139, 173n, 180, 193-96, 

227 
Hulagu, 230 
Humayun, 148 

Humboldt, William Von, quoted, 109 
Husain, Khoja, 264n 
Hu-Shien, 198 
Hu Shih, Prof., 199n 
Hyderabad, 280, 307, 310, 312 

I 

Ideals of Indian Art, The, 212n, 214n 

Idrisi,, quoted, 242 

Ilbert Bill, 326 

Iltutmish, 238 

Imperial Chemical Industries, 403, 

412-13 
Indian Civil Service, 17, 293, 294, 

295, 333, 373 
Indian Council of World Affairs, 

528n 
Indian Institute of Science, 410 
Indian States, 307-12, 457n; number 

of, 307 
Indo-China, 192, 204, 207, 417, 

538n, 568 
Indo-Greeks, 136, 142 
Indonesia, 193, 196, 203, 207, 568 
Indore, 278, 307 
Indravarman, 205 
Indus River, 51, 73, 74, Civilization, 

50, 72 
Industrial Co-operative (Indusco), 

406 
Industrial revolution, 282 
Industry, 328; growth of, 330-35; 
conditions of, 350-58; control of, 
398-99, 402-09, 413-15, 502-04 
Intermarriage, 254, 268 
Internal Security Trips, 329 
International Labour Office, 416 
IqJjal, Sir Mohamad, 350-52 



574 



Iran(ians), 73, 85, 137, 146-50, 194, 
207, 221, 227, 258, 284, 416, 417, 
421, 423, 536 

Iraq, 194, 227, 417, 536, 537 

Isabella (Spain), 230 

Islam, 194, 206, 227-31, 343-50; 
culture, 231-34; affected by 
Hinduism, 244; schism in, 386; 
influence in India, 236, 242, 265, 
270-72 

Italy, 18, 47, 416, 421, 483, 564 

I-Tsing, 74, 193, 196-97 



Jabala, 177 

Jacquemont, quoted, 282 

Jaichandra, 237 

Jain(ism), 75, 83, 94, 116, 119, 153, 

170, 176, 178, 452 
Jaipur, 283, 307 
Jaisi, Malik Mohammad, 269 
Jamait-ul-Ulema, 386, 393 
Jame Masjid, 270 
James II, 271 

Jamshedpur, 353, 409, 485n 
Japan(ese), 421, 442, 449, 453, 467, 

469, 484, 492, 494, 498, 504-05 
Jatakas, 111, 113, 114 
Jat(s), 58, 145, 272 
Jaunpur, 244 
Java, 192, 202, 205-06, 207-08, 210, 

536, 552 
Jayavarman, 205 
Jehangir, 259, 264n, 268, 270 
Jehan, Shah, 259, 270 
Jhansi, Rani of, 101, 324 
Jharia, 357 
Jinagupta, 193 
Jinnah, M.A., 352, 381, 387-94, 

426, 530 
Joan of Arc, 100 
Jodhpur, 307 

Johnstone, E. H., quoted, 168 
Jones, Sir William, 158, 165, 317 
Joshi, N.M., 414 
Jumna River, 51, 192 



K 

Kabir, 244 

Kabul, 123, 136, 147, 148, 284 

Kailasa temple, 213 

Kalhana, 102 

Kalidasa, 158-60 

Kalmga, 132-33, 204 

Kama, 101 

Kamboja, 202, 205 

Kamrupa, 192 

Kanauj, 139, 222 

Kandahar, 107, 148 

Kamshka, 116, 137 

Kant, 89 

Kanya Kumari, 60 

Kapila, 184 

Karewa, 555 

Karma, 27, 524, 525 

Karnatak, 64 

Kashmir(is), 51, 61, 134, 223, 235, 

267, 307, 309n, 310, 555, 567 
Kashmiri, 169 
Kathiawar, 307, 331 
Katyayana, 219 
Kaveripattinam, 114 
Kaveri River, 114 
Kayal, 239 
Kedernath, 191 
Keith, A. Berriedale, 115n, 163, 

179, 457 
Kemal Pasha, 350 
Kerr, Seton, quoted, 326 
Keynes, Lord, 543 
Khan, Abdul Gaffar (Badshah), 381, 

486 

Khan, Sir Syed Ahmed, 343, 344-46 
348 

Kharoshti script, 115 

Khayyam, Omar, 232 

Khilafat Committee, 380; movement, 

345-49, 386 
Khilji, Alauddin, 238 
Khiva, 234-35 
Khojas, 332, 334 
Khorasan, 194 
Khotan, 134, 194 
Khusrau, Amir, 245 
Khyber Pass, 60, 63 



575 



Kidwai, Rafi Ahmed, 469, 567 

Kiev, 230 

King Emmanuel, 283 

Korea, 197, 504 

Krishak Sabha, 386 

Krishna legends, 107, 109, 157, 192, 

208 
Krishnadat Pakkiwak, Shn, 469 
Krita age, 203 
Krutch, Joseph Wood, 164 
Kshatriyas, 85, 134, 226, 253 
Kublai Khan, 206 
Kucha, 137, 193 
Kulischer, E. M., 553n 
Kulu, 468 
Kumarajiva, 193 
Kumbh Mela, 51 
Kuomintang, 417 
Kiishans, clan, 137, 139; Empire, 

137; Period, 137 
Kwangtung, China, 196 



Labour Party, 293 

Lahore, 237 

Lamaism, 23In 

Landlordism, 304-05 

Land Tax, 111, 297 

Languages, 164-70; popular, 317-18 

Laotze, 170, 177, 199 

La Place, quoted, 217 

Lausanne, Switzerland, 46 

Law, 330, 333 

Lawrence Henry, 311 

League ofNations, 19, 382, 416, 417 

Le May, Reginald, 210n 

Lenin, 29, 30, 290 

Le Thiatre Indien, 158, 163n 

Levi, Sylvain, 158-59, 161, 163, 

210, 224 
Liddell Hart, 448-49 
Lilavati, 2 1 9 

Linlithgow, Lord, 412-13, 437, 461 
Lippman, Walter, 538 
Literature, Indian, 96, 106-10, 158- 

65; popular, 317-18 
Lloyd George, David, 537 
Locarno Pact, 417 
Lo River, 193 



Louis XIV, 270, 271 
Lo Yang, 193 
Lucknow, 325 
Lysicrates, 556 

M 

Macdonell, Prof., quoted, 88, 271 
Macedonia, 133 
Macnicol, Dr., quoted, 79 
Madhyadesha, 197 
Madhyamika philosophy, 174 
Madras, 270, 296, 316, 332, 371, 

464; Port Trust, 221; University, 

317 
Madura, 239 
Magadha, 122, 175 
Mahabharata, 67, 90, 94, 99, 106-08 
Mahabharata, (War), 99, 108 
Mahabhashya, 185 
Mahadaji Scindhia, 280 
Maharashtra, see Maratha 
Mahavira, 119 
MahSySna Buddhism, 137, 173-74, 

177, 179, 204 
Mahavyutpatti, 198 
Mahendra (Maurya), 134 
Mahmud of Ghazni, 234-37 
Maine, Sir Henry, 150 
Majapahit, 201, 207 
Majumdar, R.G., Dr. 201n, 202 
Making of the Indian Princes, The, 310, 

31 In, 323n 
Malabar, 499 
Malacca, 207 
Malaya, 113, 192, 202, 203, 206, 

207, 335, 450, 453, 470, 536, 568 
Maldive Islands, 275 
Malraux, Andri, 178 
Mamallapuram, 214 
Manak, 232 
Manchukuo, 504 
Manchuria, 207, 416, 418 
Manu, Laws of, 118, 322 
Marathas, 61, 272-76 
Marathi, 169, 317 
Marco Polo, 239 
Marshall, Sir John, quoted, 70, 71, 

204, 210 
Martand, 555 
Martel, Charles, 227 



576 



Martin, Montgomery, 301 

Marwaris, 332, 333 

Marx(ism), 29-31 

Matanga, Kashyapa, 193 

Mathai, Dr. John, quoted, 503 

Mathematics, 216-21 

Maurya Empire, 98, 110, 118, 122-24 

Maxwell, Sir Reginald, 483 

Maya, 82, 190 

Mecca, 227, 243 

Medicine, Arab, 232; Chinese, 197; 

Indian, 115 
Medina, 227 
Meerut, Mutiny at, 323 
Megasthenes, 118, 127 
Megaw, Sir John, 499 
Meghaduta, 159 
Mehta, Ratilal, 1 1 In 
Mein Kampf, 484, 494n 
Mekong River, 205 
Melas, 5 1 

Melenky Semean, 264n 

Memons, 332, 334 

Menander, 136 

Mencius, quoted, 249 

Mesopotamia, 70, 147 

Metaphysics, 27 

Metcalfe, Charles, 276, 303, 311 

Michelet, 106 

Middle Class, 57 

Middle Path (way), 130, 174 

Mihiragula, 139 

'Milinda', 114 

Milinda, King, 114, 136 

Mill, John Stuart, quoted, 560 

Milton, 160 

Mimamsa, system, 184, 189 

Ming Dynasty, 198 

Ming Ti, 193 

Mining, 112, 331 

Minorities, problem of, 382-86 

Mitakshara, Laws of, 268n 

Mitchell, Kate, 298n 

Mohammed, 227 

Mohenjo-daro, 50, 69, 72, 115, 517 

Mohsin-ul-Mulk, Nawab, 346 

Momins, 386 

Mongolia(ns), 134, 207, 227, 417 

Monier-Williams, 315 

Monism, 79, 89, 94, 128 



Monotheism, 108, 128 

Montagu-Chelmsford Report, 355 

Montreaux, 46 

Morley, Lord, 355 

Moslem(s), 62, 227-41, 265-70, 342- 
52, 520; backwardness, 390; intel- 
ligentsia, 348-350; isolated from 
nationalism, 351-52; National Con- 
gress and, 391-93, organizations, 
385-86 

Moslem League, 344, 346, 354, 
380-94, 433, 455, 463, 494, 528, 
529 

Mosul, 194 

Mudra-Rakshasa, 123, 160, 163 

Mughal Empire, 199, 241, 257-65; 
break up, 270-73, 342-43 

Muller, Max, 77, 88, 93, 183 

Munich crisis, 418, 419, 443, 444, 

Munro, Sir Thomas, 311, 323 

Murari, 160 

Murray, Gilbert, 105, 163n 

Murshidabad, Bengal, 285 

Mussolini, 18, 19, 46, 47, 416, 552 

Mutiny (Revolt) of 1857, 290, 312, 
322-27, 342, 487 

Muttra, 235 

Mysore, 307; population, 309n 

Mysticism, 26 

Mythology, 78, 99-01, 106-09 

N 

Nadir Shah, 274, 325 

NSgarjuna (philosopher), 137, 172, 
174 

Nalanda University, 135, 194, 196, 
223, 227 

Nanak, Guru, 244 

Naoroji, Dadabhai, 354 

Napoleon(ic), 275, 281, 284, 473 

Narayana, 220 

Narbada River, 324 

Nataka, 157 

National Congress, 331, 351-54, 
364; achievements of, 375-76, 
agrarian question, 371-72; coalition 
governments, 368-69; on Crippg, 
457-63; industry, 402-09; Gandhi, 
360-65; Moslem League and, 380- 
94; policies, 392-94; provincial 

577 



governments, 365-75 

National Planning Committee, 375, 
395-03 

Jfatya Shastra, 157 

Jfaubahar, 111 

Nava-vihara, 111 

Nazism, Nehru's attitude to, 18-19, 
30, 481, 540 

Nehru, Jawaharlal, arrested, 402, 
478, 479; and Buddha, 130-32, 
National Planning committee, 
Chairman, 375; elections, 64-66; 
Japanese invasion, 467; marriage, 
40-45; India, 50-52; philosophy, 
24-33; temperament, 24-25; and 
Yoga system, 187 

Nehru, Kamala, 39-49 

Neill, General, 325 

Nepal, 134, 192, 198, 279, 310 

New Delhi, 374, 450 

Nicobar Islands, 192 

Nietzsche, quoted, 36 

Nirvana, 83 

Jfitisara, 248 

Nizam-ul-Mulk, Bhairi, 240 

Noble, Margaret, quoted, 107 

Nomani, Maulana Shibli, 346 

Non-violence, 75, 108, 176, 452, 
465-66, 476, 488 

North-West Frontier Province, 368, 
381, 387, 417, 432, 486, 530 

Nyaya system, 184 

O 

Ommeya Khalifas, 229 

Oriental Conference, 167 

Orissa, 132, 296 

Oriya(s), 61 

Oudh, 58, 280, 310, 312, 323, 327 

Oxux River, 124, 136 



Pacific Aeea, 442, 449, 536 

Padmeaat, 269 

Pahlavi, 146 

Pakistan (partition), 352, 392, 456, 

530-35 
Palembang, 196 
Palestine, Moslems and, 416 
Pali language, 170, 172 



Pallava(s), 139, 204 

Panchayat, 248, 255 

Pandurangam, 205 

Pandya Kingdom, 239, 241 

Panini, 115, 164, 185 

Panipat, battle of, 274 

Pant, Govind Ballabh, 567 

Paramartha, 193 

Paris, 536 

Parliament of Religions, 337 

Parsees, 62, 147, 149, 331, 343, 390 

Parthians, 143, 147 

Pashto, 169 

Pataliputra (Patna), 123, 127, 134, 

136, 194 
Patanjali, 185 

Pathan(s), 61, 334, 381, 530 
Patiala, 307 
Payar, 555 

Peacock Throne, 270, 274 
Pearl Harbour, 419, 442 
Pearl Mosque, 270 
Peasantry, 357; in National Congress, 

360-62; uprisigs of, 272 
Penang, 453 
Persepolis, 134 
Persia, 98, lOOn, 140, 146-47, 148, 

213, 274 
Persian language, 146-47, 167, 242, 

245, 259 
Pertinax, quoted, 469 
Peshawar, 117 

Peshwa, of Poona, 274, 277, 278 
Peter the Great, 242, 264n 
Philadelphus, Ptolemy, 124, 132 
Philippine Islands, 202, 208 
Planned Society, 501-03 
Plassey, Battle of, 275, 279, 296, 298 
Plato, 85, 89, 232, 519, 559 
Plotinus, 92 
Poland, 379, 434, 551 
Polytheism, 108 
Poona, 275 
Population, 551-558 
Portugal (ese), 207, 241, 260, 283 
Poverty, 296-97, 356-57, 397-98, 

402-04 
Prajnadeva Sthavira, 195 
Prakrit, 170 
Prakriti, 185 



578 



Prasad, Rajendra, Dr. 387 

Prayaga, 192 

Pre-Buddhist India, 1 1 In 

Presidency College, 316 

Press, Indian, freedom of, 316, 348- 
49, 491; printing, 262, 313-14, 
316-17 

Priestcraft, 119-20, 178 

Prison, 15-16, 479-80; time in, 20-22; 
effect on Character, 527 

Prithvi Raj (Chauhan), 237 

Proletariat, growth of, 353; natio- 
nalism and 515-17 

Provincial autonomy, 365-70, 373 

Provincial Governments, 65; resign, 
430, 431-32; secretariats, 370 

Ptolemy, 232, 262 

Punjab(is), 61, 136, 169, 323, 332, 
334, 342, 357, 367, 370-71, 386, 
387, 403, 414, 430, 431,486, 529 

Purdah, 242, 268, 345 

Puri, 191 

Purusha, 185, 189 

Pythagoras, 155 



Quakers, 497 

Queen Elizabeth, 287 

Quietism, 361 

Quisling, 280 

Quit India Resolution, 477 

Qutb-ud-Din, Aibak, 238 

R 

Racial Assimilation, 250-51 

Racial Stocks of India, 61-63, 72-74, 

111, 121, 136-37, 143-44, 
Radhakrishnanan, Sir S., 107n, 171n, 

174, 180n, 224 
Railways, 305, 331, 410-12 
Rajagopalachari, C, 90, 436 
Rajashekhara, 222 
Rajasthani, 169 
Rajendra, 139 
Rajendra Prasad, Dr., 387 
Rajputana, 235, 280, 310 
Rajputs, 58, 61, 145, 239, 264, 269, 

271, 279, 310 
Rqjtarangini, 102 



Rama, 208 

Ramakrishna Paramhansa, Shri,314, 

336 
Ramakrishna Mission. 315, 336 
Ramanand, 244 
Ramanujam Srinivasa, 221 
Ramayana, 67, 94, 99, 106 
Rameshwaram, 192 
Ramgarh Hills, 157 
Rana Pratap, 269 
Ranchodji Amarji, 235n 
Rangoon, 464 
Rao, B. Shiva, 375-76 
Rapson, E.J., quoted, 149n 
Rashtrakutas, 139, 229,271 
Rati, 101 

Ratilal Mehta, 11 In 
Rawlinson, H. G., 155 
Ray, Sir P. C, 215 
Razia, Sultana, 238 
Religion, Nehru's opinion of, 27, 

81-84, 181-82; Art and, 210-11; 

effect of, 250, 512-15, 519-20; 

Hinduism, 74-76; Vedic, 79-81 
Renaissance, 210 
Republic, 85, 155 

Resolution of Remembrance, (1931), 42 
Rig Veda, 77, 79, 81, 116, 147 
Roe, Sir Thomas, 270 
Rolland, Romain, 89, 92n, 159n, 

188, 336 
Rome, 47, 86, 341, 554; fall of, 225 
Roosevelt, F. D., 17, 442, 482 
Rowlands, Sir Archibald, 493-94n 
Roy, Raja Ram Mohan, 315-16, 

335, 343 
Royal Asiatic Society, 317 
Royal Society, 221, 287 
Rumi Khan, 261 
Rushd Ibn, 233 
Russell, Bertrand, quoted, 32 
Russell, G. W. (A.E.) 93 



Safavis, 148 

Sahib, Dr. Khan, 432n 

Said of Toledo, 233 

Saif-ud-Din, 198, 

Saliendra, 201, 204, 205, 206 



579 



Sakas, 74 

Samarkand, 148, 230, 234 

Samkhya philosophy, 184-85 

Samudragupta, 138 

Sanatoria Dharma, 75 

Sanchi, 125 

Sanghamitra (Maurya), 134 

Sanskrit Drama, The, 163n 

Santiniketan University, 209 

Sanyasi(ns), 180, 252 

Saraswati, Swami Dayananda, 

343 
Sarnath, 52 
Sassanids, 140 
Satnamis, 272 
Satyagraha, 434 
Satyakama, story of, 177 
Savarkar, 325 
Scholarship, 166 
Schopenhauer, 21, 92 
Scindhia of Gwalior, 275, 278 
Scythians, 73, 315 
Sebokht, Severus, 220 
Seistan, 148 

Seleucus Nikator, 115, 123 
Seljuk Turks, 229 
Sen, Keshub- Chandra, 335 
Serampore, 317 
Serindia, 207 

Shahab-ud-Din Ghuri, 237 
Shah Namah, 114, 23 5 
Shaka(s), 120, 136 
Shakespeare, 161, 287, 321 
Shakuntala, 158 
Shamaism, 231n 
Shankara(charya), 180, 189-92 
Shaw, Bernard, 453, 538 
Shelley, 160 
Sher Shah, 242 
Shia Moslems, 386 
Shikarpur, 332 
Shilabhdra, 195 
Shiva, 101; Nataraja, 214 
Shivaji, 272 
Shon Wen, 197 
Shore, Sir John, 273 
Shribhoga, 196 
Shudraka, 160, 164 
Shudras, 85, 253 
Shuja-ud-Dowla, 275 

580 



Shukracharya, 248 

Shunya, 172, 217 

Shunyata, 172 

Siam (Thailand), 134, 167, 170, 

202, 204, 206, 209, 210 
Si-an-fu, China, 194 
Siberia, 23In 
Siddhartha, 130 
Sikandar, 231 
Sikhism, 244 

Sikhs, 276, 323, 324, 333, 529, 
Sikh wars, 279, 323 
Silva, Xavier da, 283 
Simla Conference, 567 
Sina, Ibn, 233 
Sind(his), 147, 169, 227, 228, 234, 

332, 367, 430, 431 
Sindhu River, 51, 74 
Singapore, 417, 423, 453 
Singh, A.N., 217n 
Singh, Maharaja Ranjit, 275, 281-82, 

323, 342 
Singh, Raja Man, 260 
Singh, Sawai Jai, 283 
Singhalese, 170 
Singhasari, 206 
Sinkiang, 134 
Si-yu-ki, 194 
Skeen Committee, 443 
•Smith, Adam, quoted, 285 
Smith, Vincent, quoted, 74 
Smritis, 256 

Socialism, 501-03, Nehru and, 29-31 

Socrates, 77, 155 

Somnath, 235 

Sone River, 127 

Sophocles, 160 

South Africa, 295, 421, 545 

Soviet Union (Russia), 29, 56, 352, 
372, 392, 405, 411, 417, 419, 442, 
470, 477, 492, 516, 530, 534, 535, 
536, 540, 543, 546, 548; Five 
Yeaf Plan, 516 

Spain, 18, 20, 227, 233, 418 

Special Armed Constabulary, 489, 490 

Spinoza, quoted, 561 

Spooner, Dr., 134 

Spykman, N.J., 538 

Sribhoga, 196 

Sringeri, 191 



Srinivasa Ramnaujam, 221 

Srivijaya, 205, 206 

St. Augustine, 92 

Stalin Joseph, 492 

Stcherbatsky, Prof., 115; quoted, 

172n, 173n, 185 
Sthavira Prajanadeva, 195 
Strabo, 124 

Sudetenland Crisis, 388, 423 
Sufism, 244 
Suhita, Queen, 206 
Sumatra, 192, 196, 202, 205, 206 
Sumerian Civilization, 70 
Sunga Dynesty, 136 
Sung-pao collection, 198 
Sung Yun, 193 
Sunni Moslems, 386 
Supra-national state, 536 
Surat, 114, 272, 296 
Suryavansh, 310 
Suryavarman, 205 
Sushruta, 116 
Suttee, 315 
Svarnabhumi, 203 
Svarnadvipa, 203 
Swaraj, 60 

Syria(ns) 133, 220, 537 



Tagore Family, 316 

Tagore, Rabindranath, 79, 84, 200, 
320-22, 339,-41, 372, 561, 563 

Tai, Chi-tao, Dr., 84 

Taj Mahal, 148, 265, 270 

Takakusu, J., 197n 

Takkola, 114 

Takshashila University, see Taxila 
University 

Tamil(s), 61, 113, 169, 317; inscrip- 
tion, 203 

Tamluk, 490 

Tamralipti, 196 

T'ang dynesty, 193, 195, 197 

Tao, 84 

Tarn, Prof., quoted, 156 

Taskhand, 193 

Tata, Jamshedji, R., 353, 410 

Tata, J.R.D., quoted, 503n 

Tata Steel and Iron Works, 403, 
409, 410, 415, 500 



Tax, Land, 292-93, 303-04 

Taxila University, 61, 117, 122, 

123, 136 
Telugu, 169, 317 

Textile Industry, 215, 331-32, 375 
Thebes, 565 
Thomas, Dr., F.F., 167 
Thomas, Prof. F.W., 90 
Thompson Edward, 279, 287, 297, 

306n, 31 In, 323n, 326n, 352 
Thirty Years War, 270 
Thucydides, 549-51 
Tibet, 63, 134, 135, 198,207,210,223 
Tilak, Bal Gangadhar, 109, 353 
Tilak, General, 235 
Timur, 231-32, 239-40, 244, 325 
Timurid renaissance, 148, 231, 257 
Tipu Sultan, 273, 275, 310 
Todar Mall, Raja, 242 
Topi, Tantia, 324 
Trade Unions, 353-56 
Trade Union Congress, 353, 395 
Travancore, 307, 527; population, 

309n 
Trincomalee, 417 
Tripoli War, 346 
Trivandrum, 167 
Tughlaq, Ghias-un-Din, 241 
Tughlaq, Mohammad, 198, 344 
Turanians, 143 
Turfan, 137, 195 
Turkestan, 213 
Turkey, 141, 346-47, 416, 417, 536; 

Moslem interests in 344-49 
Twashtri, 105 

U 

Udaipur, Maharana, 310 

Ujjaini (Ujjain), 139, 155, 159, 222; 
observatory, 155 

Unemployment, 299-01, 318-19, 

335; in America, 542 

United Provinces, 296, 323, 334, 
371, 375, 381, 403, 489 

United States of America, 151, 25Q, 

288, 372, 382, 405, 411-12, 414, 

417, 418, 421, 424, 491-92, 504, 

535; Americans in India, 451, 

British propaganda in, 461, 494; 

future of, 538-48; revolution, 286; 

581 



vital energy of, 55; Vivckananda 

on, 337 
Universities, 117-18, 132, 223; 

Moslem; 343, 345, 347, 348-49; 

strikes in, 487; under English rule, 

316-17 
Untouchables, 253-54 
Upanishads, 77, 89-94, 96, 98, 108, 

119, 173, 176, 179, 189, 339, 558; 

Ghhandogya, 93n, 177 
Urdu, 168, 317 
Urwick, 155 

V 

Vaishesika system, 184 
Vaishnavaism, 314 
Vaishyas, 85, 253, 332 
Vallabhi University, 223 
Vasanta, 101 
Vasubandhu, 173n 
Vedanta, system, 28, 32, 93, 187, 335, 

337; Advaita, 28, 32, 189, 337 
Vedas, 76-77, 79-80, 335, 520 
Vedic dharma, 74 
Vedic religion, 77, 146, 156 
Viceroy's Council, 293 
Vijayanagar, 240-41, 258 
Vikram Samvant calendar, 103 
Vikramshila University, 223 
Village autonomy, 247, 523 
Village industries, 303; distribution 

of, 402-03, 407-09 
Vindhya Mountains, 107 
Virgil, 160 
Vishaka-datta, 160 
Vishnu, 208 
Vivekananda, Swami, 92, 187-88, 

336-39, 341, 343, 558n 

W 

Wales, Dr. H.G. Quantch, 201 
Waley, Arthur, 199 



Warfare, 141, 230-31, 246, 260 

Watt, 298 

Wells, H. G., quoted, 135, 531 

Western Culture, 291-92, 314, 317 

White Huns, 120, 139, 222 

White India, 148 

White Road, 453 

Willkie, Wendell, 537; quoted, 492 

Wilson, Woodrow, 537 

Winternitz, Prof. 76 

Women, position of 41, 118, 242-43, 

267-68; rights of, 383; suttee, 315; 

underground, 357, 412 
Woodhead, Sir John, 496n, 498n 
Working Committee, 374, 426-7, 

433-34, 442, 446, 476-78, 567 
World War I, 347, 349, 353, 357, 

389, 410, 427, 536 
World War II, 18-19, 394, 401, 410, 

411, 416-68, 481-84, 536-48 
Writings, Hindu, 115-16 



Yajnavalkya, 118, 122, 358 

Yarkand, 194 

Yashovarman, 205 

Yaswant Rao, Holkar, 278 

Yavanas, 155 

Yemen, 228 

Yi-Tsing (I-Tsing), 193 

Toga system, 184-88, 337 

Young Turk Movement, 346 

Yuan-Chwang (see Huan Tsang), 

139, 180 
Yueh Chih, 74, 136, 143 



Zainulabdin, 244 

Zakaullah, Munshi, 346 

Zamindari system, 371 

Zetland, Marquis of, quoted, 256, 438 

Zoroastnanism, 137, 146, 147, 170 



582 



\ 



OXFORD INDIA PAPERBACKS 

THE DISCOVERY OF INDIA 

JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

This book has acquired the status of a classic since 

it was first published in 1946. It unfolds the 

panorama of India's past and seeks to analyse the 

sources and strength of India's national personality 

and how she fits into the modern world. It is the 

fascinating story of a celebrated Indian's quest 

for the spirit of India which has resulted in the 

continuity of a cultural tradition through 

five thousand years of history. 

This is a special centenary edition issued 
during the Jawaharlal Nehru Centenary year. 

Also Published 

JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Glimpses of World History 

An Autobiography 

Cover design by 
Kishori Ghosh 

Oxford Paperbacks 

Oxford University Press 



ISBN 19 562359 2 Rs 195 


